Title: When Language Models Lose Their Mind: The Consequences of Brain Misalignment

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.23091v1

Published Time: Wed, 25 Mar 2026 01:42:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 55

Markdown Content:
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

# WHEN LANGUAGE MODELS LOSE THEIR MIND :THE CONSEQUENCES OF BRAIN MISALIGNMENT 

Gabriele Merlin 

MPI-SWS Saarbr¨ ucken, Germany 

gmerlin@mpi-sws.org 

Mariya Toneva 

MPI-SWS Saarbr¨ ucken, Germany 

mtoneva@mpi-sws.org 

# ABSTRACT 

While brain-aligned large language models (LLMs) have garnered attention for their potential as cognitive models and for potential for enhanced safety and trust-worthiness in AI, the role of this brain alignment for linguistic competence re-mains uncertain. In this work, we investigate the functional implications of brain alignment by introducing brain-misaligned models–LLMs intentionally trained to predict brain activity poorly while maintaining high language modeling perfor-mance. We evaluate these models on over 200 downstream tasks encompassing diverse linguistic domains, including semantics, syntax, discourse, reasoning, and morphology. By comparing brain-misaligned models with well-matched brain-aligned counterparts, we isolate the specific impact of brain alignment on language understanding. Our experiments reveal that brain misalignment substantially im-pairs downstream performance, highlighting the critical role of brain alignment in achieving robust linguistic competence. These findings underscore the importance of brain alignment in LLMs and offer novel insights into the relationship between neural representations and linguistic processing. 

# 1 INTRODUCTION 

A growing body of work studies the intriguing parallels between pretrained large language models (LLMs) and the human brain, demonstrating a substantial degree of alignment between brain activity patterns and LLM activations when humans and LLMs are presented with the same linguistic input (Toneva & Wehbe, 2019; Caucheteux & King, 2020; Schrimpf et al., 2021; Goldstein et al., 2022; Aw & Toneva, 2023; Merlin & Toneva, 2024; Karamolegkou et al., 2023). This existing brain-LLM alignment has excited both cognitive scientists and AI researchers. From a cognitive perspective, brain-aligned LLMs can serve as model organisms for studying natural language processing in the human brain, offering insights into mechanisms that may underlie human-like linguistic behavior and representation (Toneva, 2021). From an AI perspective, researchers posit that brain-aligned LLMs may be safer and more trustworthy (Mineault et al., 2024). Relatedly, a recent study demon-strated the first substantial downstream benefits of improving brain alignment of a speech language model, by showing that brain-tuning a model significantly improves its performance on downstream semantic tasks (Moussa et al., 2025; Vattikonda et al., 2025). Despite this promise of brain-LLM alignment, its necessity for model performance remains an open question. It is unclear whether alignment with the human brain is inherently required for LLMs to perform well on linguistic tasks, or whether the relationship between brain alignment and model behavior is more nuanced. To address this gap, it is essential to understand not only the presence of alignment but also its functional implications. In this work, we take a direct approach to investigate the effect of brain alignment on LLM perfor-mance. We introduce brain-misaligned models–language models specifically trained to predict brain activity poorly while maintaining robust language modeling performance on the same linguistic in-puts. We evaluate these models across more than 200 downstream tasks spanning a broad spectrum of linguistic capabilities, including semantics, syntax, discourse, reasoning, and morphology. By comparing brain-misaligned models with well-matched models that differ primarily in their ability to predict brain activity rather than their language modeling proficiency, we isolate the impact of 1

> arXiv:2603.23091v1 [cs.CL] 24 Mar 2026

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Figure 1: A schematic of the proposed approach. Our method is based on fine-tuning a pretrained language model with two simultaneous objectives: maintaining its language modeling ability while reducing its alignment with brain recordings. Language modeling performance is preserved by continuing training on a fine-tuning dataset using the standard language modeling objective. Brain alignment is reduced by introducing a second prediction head and a gradient reversal layer, which encourages the model to produce representations that are uninformative about the corresponding brain activity. brain alignment on downstream linguistic performance. Our results reveal that brain-misalignment significantly impairs the ability of LLMs to perform linguistic tasks. These findings suggest that alignment with the human brain is crucial for LLMs to achieve strong linguistic performance, shed-ding light on the functional relevance of brain alignment in modern language models. Our main contributions can be summarized as follows: 1. We develop brain-misaligned models that allow us to investigate the effect of brain align-ment on the linguistic competence of language models. 2. We evaluate the effect of brain misalignment on a comprehensive set of linguistic tasks, comprising more than 200 datasets. These tasks are designed to assess various linguistic subfields (syntax, semantics, discourse, reasoning, and morphology) and linguistic phe-nomena (e.g., part of speech, protoroles, coreference resolution). 3. Via comparisons with well-matched controls, we show that brain misalignment signifi-cantly decreases linguistic competence. This suggests that brain alignment is necessary to maintain linguistic competence in language models. 4. We find that the competence drop is especially pronounced in semantic and syntactic tasks, demonstrating the importance of brain alignment for language models. 5. To further validate our findings, we also finetune a model using brain recordings, showing that the model improves in every linguistic subfield with respect to other finetuned models, and is also better than pretrained models, in particular for semantics and syntax tasks. 

# 2 RELATED WORKS 

A growing body of research investigates the alignment between pretrained language models and hu-man brain activity during language comprehension (Wehbe et al., 2014b; Jain & Huth, 2018; Toneva & Wehbe, 2019; Abdou et al., 2021; Schrimpf et al., 2021; Hosseini et al., 2024). Other studies have focused on understanding the factors that drive this alignment, identifying model characteristics or representational properties that correlate with neural responses (Goldstein et al., 2022; Toneva et al., 2022a; Oota et al., 2024a;b; Caucheteux et al., 2021; Reddy & Wehbe, 2021; Toneva et al., 2022b; Kauf et al., 2023; Gauthier & Levy, 2019; Aw & Toneva, 2023; Merlin & Toneva, 2024). Addition-ally, previous work have started to use brain data for finetuning language models (Schwartz et al., 2019) showing that is possible to improve downstream performance of pretrained language model (Negi et al., 2025). Our work extends these findings by investigating whether this alignment is not only observed but also functionally relevant for language processing, specifically, whether brain alignment is necessary for maintaining linguistic competence in language models. 2Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 In fact, a substantial body of work has focused on evaluating the linguistic competencies of lan-guage models. These studies aim to systematically assess the extent to which models capture vari-ous linguistic phenomena, including syntax, semantics, morphology, and discourse-level reasoning (Amouyal et al., 2024; Blevins et al., 2023). Benchmarks such as BLiMP (Warstadt et al., 2020), GLUE (Wang et al., 2018), SuperGLUE (Wang et al., 2019), and more recently Holmes (Waldis et al., 2024) have been used to evaluate models’ understanding of language. Our study contributes to this line of research by examining how these linguistic competencies are affected when the align-ment between language model representations and brain activity is manipulated. Additionally, a growing line of work in Causal NLP aims to uncover causal relationships between model components, training signals, or representations and downstream performance (Feder et al., 2021; 2022; Liu et al., 2025; Ortu et al., 2024). These studies design interventions or counterfactual setups to test whether certain features are causally implicated in model predictions or behaviors. Our approach is aligned with those works. We intervene on brain alignment, training models to preserve or disrupt alignment, and estimate its causal role in supporting linguistic competence. 

# 3 METHODOLOGY 

3.1 PRETRAINED MODELS 

We use BERT-based (Devlin et al., 2019), GPT2-based (Radford et al., 2019) and Llama-based (Liu et al., 2024) language models. In particular, we focus on the bert-base-cased , gpt-small 

and meta-llama/Llama-3.2-1B provided by Hugging Face (Wolf et al., 2020). BERT, GPT2 and Llama have achieved strong performance on various NLP tasks, such as question answering and sentence classification. Moreover, they have been extensively studied in prior work on brain alignment (Toneva & Wehbe, 2019; Caucheteux et al., 2021; Oota et al., 2024b). 3.2 FMRI D ATA 

We use two publicly available fMRI datasets to measure the brain alignment of language model rep-resentations. The data included in the first dataset, provided by Wehbe et al., 2014a, were collected from eight participants as they read Chapter 9 of Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone (Rowling et al., 1998) word by word. The chapter was divided into four runs of similar length, each separated by a short break. Each word was presented for 0.5 seconds, and one fMRI image (TR) was ac-quired every 2 seconds, resulting in 1211 brain images per participant. The fMRI data in the second dataset, made publicly available by Deniz et al., 2019, consist of recordings from six participants who read and listened to the same 11 stories from The Moth Radio Hour. For each modality, the dataset includes 4028 fMRI images. During reading, each word was presented for exactly the same duration as in the audio recording. In our analysis, we used only the reading data. These datasets are among the largest publicly available collections in terms of the amount of data per participant, which is crucial for obtaining accurate estimates of brain alignment. 3.3 CONTROLLING BRAIN ALIGNMENT 

To investigate the effect of brain alignment of a language model on its downstream linguistic com-petence, we develop three models: the Brain Misaligned model, the Brain Preserving model and the Brain Tuned model. The Brain Misaligned model is trained to reduce alignment with brain record-ings, while the Brain Preserving model serves as a comparison baseline that preserves brain align-ment while controlling for possible confounding factors. We also designed a Brain Tuned model that is trained to improve alignment with brain recordings. This model serves to further validate our analysis. 3.3.1 BRAIN MISALIGNED MODEL 

To evaluate the influence of brain-related information, which is an abstract concept for which no clear counterfactual input exists, we must develop methods that allow us to remove such informa-tion directly from the language model representations. In this study, we address this challenge by designing an intervention to language models that aims to remove brain-related information from 3Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 their representations, without the need to generate counterfactual inputs. This enables us to investi-gate the necessity of brain alignment for natural language processing abilities. Our approach is based on adversarial fine-tuning (Ganin et al., 2016) of language models, using a prediction head ( brain mapping head in Figure 1) and a gradient reversal layer to remove the targeted capacity, i.e. brain prediction, while simultaneously fine-tuning a second head to preserve the language modeling performance. The model is finetuned using the stimuli from the Harry Potter fMRI dataset (Wehbe et al., 2014a) or from the Moth Radio Hour fMRI dataset for the language modeling loss, and the corresponding fMRI recordings for the loss of the brain mapping head. For training, we select only voxels with an estimated noise ceiling > 0.05 (see Appendix C for details) belonging to regions of the brain known to process language (Fedorenko et al., 2010; Fedorenko & Thompson-Schill, 2014; Binder et al., 2009; Oota et al., 2024a) and used by previous works to investigate brain alignment of language models. Additional details on the prediction of brain recordings are reported in Appendix B. The total loss is defined as: 

L = ωlm ∗ L lm + ωba ∗ L ba 

where Llm is the language modeling loss, Lba is the brain-alignment loss, and ωlm and ωba are weighting factors to balance the two objectives. The language modeling loss Llm corresponds to the standard cross-entropy loss used during language model pretraining, while the brain-alignment loss Lba is defined as the mean negative squared Pearson correlation between the predicted voxels in each batch and the ground truth voxel values. ωlm is fixed at 0.1, a value chosen based on the relative magnitude of the losses prior to fine-tuning (see Section 3.3.4 for details). 3.3.2 BRAIN PRESERVING MODEL 

Similarly, we designed a control condition to account for potential confounding factors and to serve as a comparison for the Brain Misaligned model. We finetune this model using the same procedure as for the Brain Misaligned model, but during training we permute the order of the fMRI images to disrupt the correspondence between stimuli and brain activity. By using permuted fMRI images, our method also accounts for the effects of the adversarial removal itself, which can influence the model’s representations. This controls for potential confounders such as the effect of fine-tuning on language modeling and the effect of adversarial fine-tuning. The only difference between conditions remains the correspondence between stimuli and fMRI images. 3.3.3 BRAIN TUNED MODEL 

To complement our analysis, we designed a Brain Tuned model. This model was finetuned using the same procedure as the Brain Misaligned model (i.e. a language modeling head and a brain mapping head), but we removed the gradient reversal layer and use as loss function Lba the mean negative Pearson correlation. This procedure actively encourages the model to increase its alignment with brain recordings while maintaining language modeling performance. This model serves as a validation tool to test the complementary hypothesis: if decreasing alignment impairs competence, does increasing it lead to performance gains? 3.3.4 MODEL SELECTION AND TRAINING 

To train the models, we use training samples consisting of sequences of words corresponding to 5 TRs. The stimulus text is divided into four consecutive sections to enable cross-validation. For training of BERT-based, GPT2-based and Llama-based Misaligned, Brain Preserving and Brain Tuned models we train applying LoRA (Hu et al., 2022) to the parameters. We train for 5 epochs with a batch size of 16, and AdamW as optimizer. The language modeling loss weight ωlm = 0 .1

and ωba = 10 .

Conditions for a successful comparison between models. The comparison is considered suc-cessful when the Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving models achieve similar performance on the language modeling objective (tested using Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p < 0.05 ), while the Brain Misaligned model shows a significantly lower ability to align with brain recordings. 4Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 3.4 EVALUATION 

To evaluate the models, we use three types of tasks: language modeling, brain alignment, and down-stream linguistic tasks. Both language modeling and brain alignment are evaluated using the same text, which corresponds to the fMRI stimulus, and is held-out during training. We assess these two tasks using overlapping sequences of words belonging to 5 TRs, following the approach of previous work (Merlin & Toneva, 2024). 

Language modeling. For language modeling we follow the best practice for evaluation of BERT-based, GPT2-based and Llama-based models. For each test example, we measure the average cross entropy across the randomly masked tokens (15% of total number of tokens, see Devlin et al. (2018) for details) for BERT-based models, for GPT2-based and Llama-based models the cross entropy over all tokens (see Radford et al. (2019) for details). 

Brain alignment. We measure the brain alignment between BERT, GPT2 and Llama representa-tions and fMRI recordings using a linear prediction head on top of the last transformer block. This prediction head is trained to output brain activity values from the model’s representations and is widely used in previous work to assess how well language models can predict brain signals (Jain & Huth, 2018; Toneva & Wehbe, 2019; Schrimpf et al., 2021). We train this linear function, regu-larized with a ridge penalty, using cross-validation and evaluate its performance on held-out data. The ridge parameter is selected via nested cross-validation. Consequently, for each participant, we train one model for each held-out run (see Section 3.2), then aggregate the predictions to compute brain alignment. Further details on the prediction head are provided in Appendix B. Brain alignment is quantified using Pearson correlation, computed between the predictions on held-out data and the corresponding ground truth values. Specifically, for a model q and voxel vj with corresponding held-out fMRI values yj , brain alignment is computed as: 

brain alignment (q, v j ) = corr ( ˆ yj , y j ),

where ˆyj = q(X)Wq,j , X is the input text sample to model q, and Wq,j are the learned prediction weights for voxel vj .

Linguistic competence. To investigate the linguistic competence of language models, we use more than 200 datasets, designed to evaluate linguistic competence in language models via classifier-based probing (Waldis et al., 2024). The benchmark covers datasets spanning various linguistic phenomena and subfields, including syntax, morphology, semantics, reasoning, and discourse, ex-amples of tasks are reported in Appendix Table 1. Details about the benchmark and the included datasets are provided in Appendix A. For each task, each model is evaluated using 6 seeds, which influence the probe initialization and the ordering of data during training and evaluation. To determine whether one model outperforms the other, we not only compare the average evaluation metric (see Waldis et al. (2024) for details), but also assess whether the difference is statistically significant using a two-sample t-test. We assign a “win” to a model only for datasets where the difference reaches statistical significance. For each dataset and model pair, we thus obtain a binary “win” matrix indicating whether one model significantly outperforms the other (1) or not (0). Since each subject has a pair of models corresponding to different held-out runs during training, we av-erage the resulting win matrices across runs, yielding a win score for each participant, dataset, and model. The win score quantifies how consistently one model outperforms the other across different held-out runs. 

# 4 RESULTS 

4.1 EFFECTS ON BRAIN ALIGNMENT 

Figure 2A–D shows brain alignment of the BERT-based Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving models on the Harry Potter dataset, as well as a contrast between the two, for a representative participant. Specifically, Figures 2A and 2B show the Pearson correlation between the predicted voxel values and the ground truth for the Brain Preserving model and the Brain Misaligned model, respectively. Figure 2C shows the contrast between the two models, i.e., the difference in Pear-5Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026    

> A) Brain Preserving B) Brain Misaligned
> Pearson Correlation Pearson Correlation C) Brain Misalignment Effect D) Language ROIs
> Difference in Pearson Correlation

Figure 2: Brain alignment of the BERT-based Brain Preserving (A) and Brain Misaligned (B) mod-els for one participant on the Harry Potter dataset (see Appendix D for all participants), and the difference between the two (C). The Brain Misaligned model exhibits substantially weaker align-ment, particularly in language regions (C, D). son correlation for each voxel. Results for the remaining participants, other language models and datasets are consistent and reported in Appendix D, E, F, G, H, I. 

Brain Preserving Model. In Figure 2A, we observe that the Brain Preserving model aligns well with brain activity across the whole brain, and in particular within language-related regions (visual-ized in Figure 2D), as identified by previous work (Fedorenko et al., 2010; Fedorenko & Thompson-Schill, 2014; Binder et al., 2009). We quantify the alignment of the Brain Preserving model in Appendix D. Since these models are explicitly finetuned to preserve brain alignment, this result is consistent with prior studies showing that language models exhibit alignment with fMRI signals (Toneva & Wehbe, 2019; Schrimpf et al., 2021; Goldstein et al., 2022; Oota et al., 2024b; Merlin & Toneva, 2024). 

Brain Misaligned Model. In Figure 2B, we observe that the Brain Misaligned model does not align well with brain activity across the whole brain. The Pearson correlation values are particularly low in several brain areas. We quantify the alignment of brain misaligned model in Appendix D. To show the effect of brain misalignment, in Figure 2C we show the contrast between the Pearson correlation values of the Brain Preserving model and the Brain Misaligned model. As expected, the difference in Pearson correlation is especially high in language-related regions (visualized in Figure 2D). This confirms that our approach is effective at removing brain-relevant information in particular in language-related areas. 6Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 We assess whether the average brain correlation (computed across voxels in language regions with an estimated noise ceiling > 0.05, see Appendix C) significantly differs between the two models using a t-test. For example, for BERT trained on Harry Potter dataset we find that for six participants, there is a significant drop in brain alignment, while no significant difference in language modeling ability is observed between the two models. Only the models corresponding to these participants are included in the comparison of linguistic competence. 4.2 EFFECTS ON LINGUISTIC COMPETENCE 

Figures 3A, 3B, and 4 show the performance on linguistic competence averaged across models and dataset combinations (BERT-Harry, BERT-Moth, GPT2-Harry, GPT2-Moth, Llama-Harry, Llama-Moth). Specifically, Figure 3A illustrates the overall effect on linguistic competence, considering all tasks. Figure 3B presents the results by linguistic subfields, while Figure 4 focuses on specific linguistic phenomena. Specific results for each combinations of models and dataset are reported in Appendix E, F, G, H, I. 

Effects on the Overall Linguistic Competence. Figure 3A shows the average win rate in the linguistic competence benchmark for the Brain Misaligned models and the Brain Preserving models. We observe a significant difference between the two conditions. These results indicate that removing brain alignment leads to lower performance on downstream linguistic tasks, suggesting that brain alignment is necessary to preserve linguistic competence. Statistical tests on each individual model and dataset combinations reveal a marked difference in performance between the Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving on the overall linguistic competence. For the BERT-based and Llama-based models the difference is significant, although for GPT2-based models on the Harry Potter dataset the difference does not reach conventional statistical significance (p-value = 0 .055 ), the trend mirrors the effect observed in the BERT-based models. For the GPT2-based models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset, results are not consistent due to the weaker effect of brain removal. 

Effects across Linguistic Subfields. We further investigate this effect by analyzing performance across different linguistic subfields: syntax, semantics, discourse, reasoning, and morphology. As shown in Figure 3B, the Brain Misaligned model consistently underperforms the Brain Preserving model in discourse, morphology, reasoning, semantics, and syntax tasks. This suggests that brain alignment is particularly important for supporting linguistic competence. Statistical tests on individ-ual model and dataset combinations reveal significant differences in the majority of model-dataset combinations, even though the averaged results are not statistically significant. In particular, BERT trained on Harry Potter reveals statistical significance across all linguistic subfields. BERT trained on Moth Radio Hour and Llama trained on Harry Potter on the semantics and syntax subfields, while Llama trained on Moth Radio Hour on the syntax and morphology subfields. 

Effects across Linguistic Phenomena. To gain finer-grained insights, we analyzed results based on specific linguistic phenomena, focusing on those represented by more than five datasets. As shown in Figure 4, we found that for the majority of tasks the Brain Preserving models are better than the Brain Misaligned models, providing further evidence that brain alignment is crucial for these phenomena. Examples for these linguistic phenomena can be found in Table 2. 4.3 FURTHER VALIDATION VIA BRAIN -T UNING 

We conducted a complementary analysis by introducing a Brain Tuned model, in which, contrary to the Brain Misaligned model, the brain alignment capabilities were intentionally increased during training. We then compared this new model with the Brain Preserving model. The analysis reveals that in every experimental setting, the Brain Tuned model consistently outperforms the Brain Preserving model with a statistically significant difference. This result suggests that increasing brain alignment translates into a general improvement in linguistic competence. Averaged results across model and dataset combinations are shown in Figure 5A. Figure 5B shows the averaged results across linguistic subfield, showing a statistically significant results for the syntax and semantic subfield, and Figure 6 shows the differences across linguistic phenomena, showing statistically significant results for two tasks. Detailed results for each of these combinations are available in the Appendix D, E, F,G,H, I. 7Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 3: Average win rate and standard error across models and dataset combinations of the Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving models across tasks (Left) and across different linguistic subfields (Right). The average win rate indicates how often each model outperforms its counterpart across model and dataset combinations. The Brain Preserving model significantly outperforms the Brain Misaligned model ( p < 0.05 , Wilcoxon signed-rank test) (Left). This result suggests that removing brain alignment impairs linguistic competence. The Brain Preserving model shows a higher win rate in all the linguistic subfield, in particular for semantics and syntax (Right), even if the differences are not statistically significant (assessed using Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction), because of unique differences across model-dataset combinations. 

Figure 4: Average win rate with standard error across model and dataset combinations, across var-ious linguistic phenomena for the Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving models. Each bar repre-sents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Brain Preserving models tend to outperform Brain Misaligned models in the majority of tasks. Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. We also compared the Brain Tuned model directly with the original Pretrained model (i.e., the base model before any alignment intervention). While the Brain Tuned model showed an advantage in the majority of experimental settings, the Pretrained model maintained stronger performance in some settings. Results are reported in the Appendix D, E, F,G,H, I. 

# 5 DISCUSSION 

To investigate the importance of brain alignment in language models, we designed two models: the Brain Misaligned model, which is intended to remove brain alignment while preserving language modeling capabilities, and the Brain Preserving model, which accounts for potential confounders. 8Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 5: Average win rate and standard error across models and dataset combinations of the Brain Preserving and Brain Tuned models across tasks (Left) and across different linguistic subfields (Right). The Brain Tuned model significantly outperforms the Brain Preserving model ( p < 0.05 ,Wilcoxon signed-rank test) (Left). This result suggests that improving the brain alignment lead to performance gains in linguistic competence. The Brain Tuned model shows a higher win rate in the discourse, morphology, reasoning, semantics and syntax subfield (Right) and significantly higher in semantics and syntax ( p < 0.05 , Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction), suggesting that improving brain alignment affects semantics and syntax tasks. 

Figure 6: Average win rate with standard error across model and dataset combinations, across var-ious linguistic phenomena for the Brain Tuned and Brain Preserving models. Each bar represents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard er-ror. Brain Tuned models tend to outperform Brain Preserving models in the majority of tasks, with statistically significant difference ( p < 0.05 , Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction) for filler gap and negative polarity item licensing . Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. We showed that the Brain Misaligned model has weak alignment with brain recordings, while the Brain Preserving model exhibits stronger alignment, particularly in language-related regions of in-terest. The contrast between the two models, across multiple experimental settings, reveals that the difference in alignment is especially pronounced in these areas. We further evaluated the linguistic competence of these models to reveal the functional importance of brain alignment. Our results demonstrate that Brain Misaligned models perform worse than Brain Preserving models on linguistic tasks, across multiple model-dataset combinations, supporting the hypothesis that brain alignment is crucial for maintaining linguistic competence. Across multiple experimental settings the performance drop is particularly evident in tasks related to the semantic and syntactic subfield, although there are unique differences in every experimental setting. 9Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 We extended this investigation by introducing a Brain Tuned model, designed to increase brain alignment. The results of this intervention further strengthen our core argument. We found that the Brain Tuned model systematically outperformed the Brain Preserving model in all experimental set-tings and in particular in semantic and syntax tasks. In many model-dataset combinations the Brain Tuned model outperform the pretrained model on linguistic competence highlighting the relevance of brain-related signal for improving those competences. These findings, across multiple model-dataset combinations, suggest that brain-aligned information plays a key role in supporting performance on linguistic tasks. It is important to note that the absence of statistically significant differences for other linguistic subfields or phenomena does not imply that brain alignment is unimportant for those tasks. 

Limitations. Our study has three main limitations. Firstly, the benchmark used to assess linguis-tic competence, while extensive, is not exhaustive. There are many additional datasets available that could be included in future evaluations (Wang et al., 2018; 2019). Moreover, some linguistic subfields (e.g., discourse) and specific linguistic phenomena are represented by only a few datasets. As a result, the observed behavior of the Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving models may be influenced by the limited coverage and distribution of tasks in certain categories. Secondly, our results are based on limited fMRI datasets. While these widely studied datasets offer extensive per-participant data, findings may still be specific to their characteristics. We designed our exper-iments using cross-validation, testing on held-out data and across multiple participants to improve generalizability. However, results might differ with different types of linguistic stimuli. Expanding to more datasets, languages, or cognitive tasks would be an important next step. Thirdly, while the ”Brain Misaligned” model does show a clear overall worse performance, there are differences across linguistic subfields depending on the model-dataset combination. Datasets and models can contain different types of information related to linguistic subfields. Nevertheless, our results are informa-tive in demonstrating the effectiveness of our methodology and in highlighting the importance of the emergent brain alignment ability of language models. 

# 6 CONCLUSION 

We designed a direct approach to investigate the necessity of brain alignment in pretrained language models. Specifically, we introduced two models: the Brain Misaligned model and the Brain Preserv-ing model. When used together, they allow us to isolate and control for the effect of brain alignment on downstream linguistic competence. We evaluated these models on more than 200 datasets spanning various linguistic subfields, includ-ing semantics, syntax, morphology, discourse, and reasoning, as well as a broad range of linguistic phenomena. Our results revealed a significant drop in linguistic competence, particularly on se-mantic and syntactic tasks, for the Brain Misaligned model, suggesting that brain alignment plays a critical role in downstream linguistic performance. This conclusion is further supported by our complementary finding that a Brain Tuned model, optimized to increase alignment, consistently outperformed the Brain Preserving model particularly in those tasks. These findings are highly relevant to the natural language processing literature. Previous studies have explored why brain alignment emerges during pretraining, pointing to possible contributing factors and suggesting that if this alignment emerges, it may reflect shared information acquisition between artificial and biological neural networks. Our work contributes a new dimension to this discussion: we not only ask why brain alignment emerges, but also whether it is important for linguistic competence. Our results provide initial evidence that brain alignment is functionally important, motivating future research in this area. Moreover, our methodology provides a general framework for assessing the causal role of emer-gent properties, as brain alignment, in language models. Future work could apply our methodology to different models, exploring other datasets, or extending the approach to assess the necessity of alignment-related capabilities across different modalities (e.g., speech, image) or neural architec-tures. 10 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Work by Gabriele Merlin was supported by the CS@max planck graduate center. 

# REFERENCES 

Mostafa Abdou, Ana Valeria Gonz´ alez, Mariya Toneva, Daniel Hershcovich, and Anders Søgaard. Does injecting linguistic structure into language models lead to better alignment with brain record-ings? arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.12608 , 2021. Samuel Amouyal, Aya Meltzer-Asscher, and Jonathan Berant. Large language models for psy-cholinguistic plausibility pretesting. In Yvette Graham and Matthew Purver (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EACL 2024 , pp. 166–181, St. Julian’s, Malta, March 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL https://aclanthology. org/2024.findings-eacl.12/ .Khai Loong Aw and Mariya Toneva. Training language models to summarize narratives improves brain alignment. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. Jeffrey R Binder, Rutvik H Desai, William W Graves, and Lisa L Conant. Where is the semantic system? a critical review and meta-analysis of 120 functional neuroimaging studies. Cerebral cortex , 19(12):2767–2796, 2009. Terra Blevins, Hila Gonen, and Luke Zettlemoyer. Prompting language models for linguistic structure. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 6649–6663, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.367. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023. acl-long.367/ .Charlotte Caucheteux and Jean-R´ emi King. Language processing in brains and deep neural net-works: computational convergence and its limits. BioRxiv , 2020. Charlotte Caucheteux, Alexandre Gramfort, and Jean-Remi King. Decomposing lexical and com-positional syntax and semantics with deep language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.01620 ,2021. Fatma Deniz, Anwar O Nunez-Elizalde, Alexander G Huth, and Jack L Gallant. The representation of semantic information across human cerebral cortex during listening versus reading is invariant to stimulus modality. Journal of Neuroscience , 39(39):7722–7736, 2019. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 , 2018. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 conference of the North American chapter of the association for computational linguistics: human language technologies, volume 1 (long and short papers) , pp. 4171–4186, 2019. Amir Feder, Nadav Oved, Uri Shalit, and Roi Reichart. Causalm: Causal model explanation through counterfactual language models. Computational Linguistics , 47(2):333–386, 07 2021. ISSN 0891-2017. doi: 10.1162/coli a 00404. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/coli_ a_00404 .Amir Feder, Katherine A Keith, Emaad Manzoor, Reid Pryzant, Dhanya Sridhar, Zach Wood-Doughty, Jacob Eisenstein, Justin Grimmer, Roi Reichart, Margaret E Roberts, et al. Causal in-ference in natural language processing: Estimation, prediction, interpretation and beyond. Trans-actions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 10:1138–1158, 2022. E. Fedorenko, P.-J. Hsieh, A. Nieto-Castanon, S. Whitfield-Gabrieli, and N. Kanwisher. New method for fMRI investigations of language: Defining ROIs functionally in individual subjects. Journal of Neurophysiology , 104(2):1177–1194, 2010. 11 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Evelina Fedorenko and Sharon L Thompson-Schill. Reworking the language network. Trends in cognitive sciences , 18(3):120–126, 2014. Yaroslav Ganin, Evgeniya Ustinova, Hana Ajakan, Pascal Germain, Hugo Larochelle, Franc ¸ois Laviolette, Mario March, and Victor Lempitsky. Domain-adversarial training of neural networks. 

Journal of machine learning research , 17(59):1–35, 2016. Jon Gauthier and Roger Levy. Linking artificial and human neural representations of language. In Kentaro Inui, Jing Jiang, Vincent Ng, and Xiaojun Wan (eds.), Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Con-ference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pp. 529–539, Hong Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/D19-1050. URL 

https://aclanthology.org/D19-1050 .Ariel Goldstein, Zaid Zada, Eliav Buchnik, Mariano Schain, Amy Price, Bobbi Aubrey, Samuel A Nastase, Amir Feder, Dotan Emanuel, Alon Cohen, et al. Shared computational principles for language processing in humans and deep language models. Nature neuroscience , 25(3):369–380, 2022. Eghbal A. Hosseini, Martin Schrimpf, Yian Zhang, Samuel Bowman, Noga Zaslavsky, and Evelina Fedorenko. Artificial Neural Network Language Models Predict Human Brain Responses to Language Even After a Developmentally Realistic Amount of Training. Neurobiology of Lan-guage , 5(1):43–63, 04 2024. ISSN 2641-4368. doi: 10.1162/nol a 00137. URL https: //doi.org/10.1162/nol_a_00137 .Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Con-ference on Learning Representations , 2022. URL https://openreview.net/forum? id=nZeVKeeFYf9 .Alexander G Huth, Wendy A De Heer, Thomas L Griffiths, Fr´ ed´ eric E Theunissen, and Jack L Gallant. Natural speech reveals the semantic maps that tile human cerebral cortex. Nature , 532 (7600):453–458, 2016. Shailee Jain and Alexander Huth. Incorporating context into language encoding models for fMRI. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , pp. 6628–6637, 2018. Antonia Karamolegkou, Mostafa Abdou, and Anders Søgaard. Mapping brains with language mod-els: A survey. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and Naoaki Okazaki (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pp. 9748–9762, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.618. URL 

https://aclanthology.org/2023.findings-acl.618/ .Carina Kauf, Greta Tuckute, Roger Levy, Jacob Andreas, and Evelina Fedorenko. Lexical semantic content, not syntactic structure, is the main contributor to ann-brain similarity of fmri responses in the language network. bioRxiv , 2023. doi: 10.1101/2023.05.05.539646. URL https://www. biorxiv.org/content/early/2023/05/06/2023.05.05.539646 .Xiaoyu Liu, Paiheng Xu, Junda Wu, Jiaxin Yuan, Yifan Yang, Yuhang Zhou, Fuxiao Liu, Tian-rui Guan, Haoliang Wang, Tong Yu, Julian McAuley, Wei Ai, and Furong Huang. Large lan-guage models and causal inference in collaboration: A comprehensive survey. In Luis Chiruzzo, Alan Ritter, and Lu Wang (eds.), Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025 , pp. 7668–7684, Albuquerque, New Mexico, April 2025. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-195-7. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025. findings-naacl.427/ .Zechun Liu, Changsheng Zhao, Igor Fedorov, Bilge Soran, Dhruv Choudhary, Raghuraman Krish-namoorthi, Vikas Chandra, Yuandong Tian, and Tijmen Blankevoort. Spinquant: Llm quantiza-tion with learned rotations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16406 , 2024. Gabriele Merlin and Mariya Toneva. Language models and brains align due to more than next-word prediction and word-level information. In Yaser Al-Onaizan, Mohit Bansal, and Yun-Nung Chen 12 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 (eds.), Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-ing , pp. 18431–18454, Miami, Florida, USA, November 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.emnlp-main.1024. URL https://aclanthology. org/2024.emnlp-main.1024/ .Patrick Mineault, Niccol` o Zanichelli, Joanne Zichen Peng, Anton Arkhipov, Eli Bingham, Julian Jara-Ettinger, Emily Mackevicius, Adam Marblestone, Marcelo Mattar, Andrew Payne, et al. Neuroai for ai safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.18526 , 2024. Omer Moussa, Dietrich Klakow, and Mariya Toneva. Improving semantic understanding in speech language models via brain-tuning. ICLR , 2025. Anuja Negi, Subba Reddy Oota, Anwar O Nunez-Elizalde, Manish Gupta, and Fatma Deniz. Brain-informed fine-tuning for improved multilingual understanding in language models. bioRxiv , pp. 2025–07, 2025. Shinji Nishimoto, An T Vu, Thomas Naselaris, Yuval Benjamini, Bin Yu, and Jack L Gallant. Re-constructing visual experiences from brain activity evoked by natural movies. Current biology ,21(19):1641–1646, 2011. Subba Reddy Oota, Emin C ¸ elik, Fatma Deniz, and Mariya Toneva. Speech language models lack important brain-relevant semantics. ACL , 2024a. Subba Reddy Oota, Manish Gupta, and Mariya Toneva. Joint processing of linguistic properties in brains and language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024b. Francesco Ortu, Zhijing Jin, Diego Doimo, Mrinmaya Sachan, Alberto Cazzaniga, and Bernhard Sch¨ olkopf. Competition of mechanisms: Tracing how language models handle facts and coun-terfactuals. In Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (eds.), Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-pers) , pp. 8420–8436, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguis-tics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.458. URL https://aclanthology.org/2024. acl-long.458/ .Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever, et al. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog , 1(8):9, 2019. Aniketh Janardhan Reddy and Leila Wehbe. Can fmri reveal the representation of syntactic structure in the brain? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:9843–9856, 2021. J.K. Rowling, M. GrandPre, M. GrandPr´ e, T. Taylor, Arthur A. Levine Books, and Scholastic Inc. Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone . Harry Potter. A.A. Levine Books, 1998. ISBN 9780590353403. URL https://books.google.de/books?id=zXgTdQagLGkC .Martin Schrimpf, Idan Asher Blank, Greta Tuckute, Carina Kauf, Eghbal A Hosseini, Nancy Kan-wisher, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Evelina Fedorenko. The neural architecture of language: In-tegrative modeling converges on predictive processing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 118(45), 2021. Dan Schwartz, Mariya Toneva, and Leila Wehbe. Inducing brain-relevant bias in natural language processing models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. Mariya Toneva. Bridging language in machines with language in the brain . PhD thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, 2021. Mariya Toneva and Leila Wehbe. Interpreting and improving natural-language processing (in ma-chines) with natural language-processing (in the brain). Advances in Neural Information Process-ing Systems , 32, 2019. Mariya Toneva, Tom M Mitchell, and Leila Wehbe. Combining computational controls with natural text reveals aspects of meaning composition. Nature Computational Science , 2(11):745–757, 2022a. 13 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Mariya Toneva, Jennifer Williams, Anand Bollu, Christoph Dann, and Leila Wehbe. Same cause; different effects in the brain. Causal Learning and Reasoning , 2022b. Nishitha Vattikonda, Aditya R Vaidya, Richard J Antonello, and Alexander G Huth. Brain-wavlm: Fine-tuning speech representations with brain responses to language. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.08866 , 2025. Andreas Waldis, Yotam Perlitz, Leshem Choshen, Yufang Hou, and Iryna Gurevych. Holmes a benchmark to assess the linguistic competence of language models. Transactions of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics , 12:1616–1647, 2024. doi: 10.1162/tacl a 00718. URL 

https://aclanthology.org/2024.tacl-1.88/ .Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R Bowman. Glue: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.07461 , 2018. Alex Wang, Yada Pruksachatkun, Nikita Nangia, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. Superglue: A stickier benchmark for general-purpose language understanding systems. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. Alex Warstadt, Alicia Parrish, Haokun Liu, Anhad Mohananey, Wei Peng, Sheng-Fu Wang, and Samuel R Bowman. Blimp: The benchmark of linguistic minimal pairs for english. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 8:377–392, 2020. Leila Wehbe, Brian Murphy, Partha Talukdar, Alona Fyshe, Aaditya Ramdas, and Tom Mitchell. Simultaneously uncovering the patterns of brain regions involved in different story reading sub-processes. PloS one , 9(11):e112575, 2014a. Leila Wehbe, Ashish Vaswani, Kevin Knight, and Tom Mitchell. Aligning context-based statistical models of language with brain activity during reading. In Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 233–243, 2014b. Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Remi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander Rush. Transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. In Qun Liu and David Schlangen (eds.), Proceedings of the 2020 Confer-ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pp. 38– 45, Online, October 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2020. emnlp-demos.6. URL https://aclanthology.org/2020.emnlp-demos.6/ .

# A LINGUISTIC COMPETENCE BENCHMARK 

We evaluated the linguistic competence of language models using classifier-based probing on more than 200 datasets collected from various sources and included in the Holmes benchmark (Waldis et al., 2024). The benchmark covers datasets spanning a wide range of linguistic phenomena and subfields, including syntax, morphology, semantics, reasoning, and discourse. A comprehensive list of linguistic phenomena and their corresponding subfields is provided in Table 3. For the evaluation, we use the flash-holmes version of the benchmark, which is designed to reduce computational cost while maintaining precision in assessing language model performance (see Waldis et al. (2024) for details). Examples of tasks associated with the linguistic phenomena and linguistic subfield used in our study are reported in Tables 1 and 2 and illustrated in Figure 4. 

# B BRAIN MAPPING HEAD 

To predict the fMRI recordings corresponding to each TR, we use a linear function, regularized with a ridge penalty, that maps model representations to fMRI space, specifically targeting voxels with an estimated noise ceiling > 0.05 located in language-related regions of interest (Figure 2D). This function is trained in a cross-validated way and evaluated on held-out data. The ridge penalty 14 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Table 1: Examples for linguistic subfields from Waldis et al. (2024). The relevant part of the example for the specific label is underlined.                      

> Type Phenomena Example Label Morphology Subject-Verb Agreement And then, the cucumber was hurled into the air. Correct
> And then, the cucumber were hurled into the air. Wrong
> Syntax Part-of-Speech And then, the cucumber was hurled into the air. NN (Noun Singular)
> Semantics Semantic Roles And then, the cucumber was hurled into the air. Direction
> Reasoning Negation And then, the cucumber was hurled into the air. No Negation
> Discourse Node Type in Rhetorical Tree And then, the cucumber was hurled into the air. Satellite

Table 2: Examples for selected linguistic phenomena from Waldis et al. (2024). The asterisk (*) indicates the correct option when applicable. 

Phenomena Illustrative Example 

argument-structure Most cashiers are disliked*/flirted. 

binding Carlos said that Lori helped him*/himself. 

determiner noun agreement Craig explored that grocery store*/stores. 

event structure Give them to a library or burn them. ⇒ Distributive 

filler-gap Brett knew what many waiters find.*/Brett knew that many waiters find. 

genericity I assume you mean the crazy horse memorial. ⇒ Not Dynamic 

island-effects Which bikes is John fixing?*/Which is John fixing bikes? 

antonym negation It was not*/really hot, it was cold. 

negative polarity item licensing Only/Even Bill would ever complain. 

semantic proto-roles These look fine to me. ⇒ Exists as physical 

quantifiers There aren’t many*/all lights darkening. 

rhetorical structure theory The statistics quoted by the ” new ” Census Bureau report ⇒ Elaboration 

subject-verb agreement A sketch of lights does not*/do not appear. is selected via nested cross-validation. For each participant, we train four functions, each using three of the four fMRI subsets for training and the remaining one for testing. To generate model representations, we average the token embeddings corresponding to each TR, and construct the input by concatenating the embeddings from the current TR with those from the previous five TRs. The features of the words presented in the previous TRs are included to account for the lag in the hemodynamic response that fMRI records. Because the response measured by fMRI is an indirect consequence of brain activity that peaks about 6 seconds after stimulus onset, predictive methods commonly include preceding time points (Nishimoto et al., 2011; Wehbe et al., 2014a; Huth et al., 2016). This allows for a data-driven estimation of the hemodynamic response functions (HRFs) for each voxel, which is preferable to assuming one because different voxels may exhibit different HRFs. 15 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 Table 3: List of linguistic phenomena and their corresponding subfields in the Holmes benchmark. linguistic phenomena subfield next sentence prediction discourse rhetorical structure theory discourse sentence order discourse discourse connective discourse coreference resolution discourse bridging discourse irregular forms morphology subject-verb agreement morphology determiner noun agreement morphology anaphor agreement morphology age comparison reasoning negation reasoning speculation reasoning multi-hop composition reasoning property conjunction reasoning object comparison reasoning antonym negation reasoning encyclopedic composition reasoning taxonomy conjunction reasoning always never reasoning object gender semantics passive semantics protoroles semantics quantifiers semantics synonym-/antonym-detection semantics verb dynamic semantics semantic role labeling semantics sentiment analysis semantics time semantics subject animacy semantics subject gender semantics tense semantics relation classification semantics linguistic phenomena subfield semantic odd man out semantics word sense semantics word content semantics coordination inversion semantics object animacy semantics event structure semantics factuality semantics complex words semantics genericity semantics metaphor semantics named entity labeling semantics negative polarity item licensing semantics argument structure syntax bigram-shift syntax binding syntax tree-depth syntax case syntax subject-verb agreement syntax anaphor agreement syntax top-constituent-task syntax subject number syntax deoncausative-inchoative alternation syntax control / raising syntax ellipsis syntax sentence length syntax filler gap syntax readability syntax island effects syntax local attractor syntax part-of-speech syntax object number syntax constituent parsing syntax negative polarity item licensing syntax 

# C NOISE CEILING ESTIMATION 

To assess the signal quality of the fMRI data, we estimated noise ceiling values, which quantify the proportion of variance that could be explained by an ideal data-generating model. This method involves predicting the fMRI activity of a target participant using linear models trained on data from another participant. For a more detailed explanation, refer to Schrimpf et al. (2021). Estimating the noise ceiling is particularly useful given the inherently high level of noise in fMRI data. 16 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Figure 7: Voxel-wise estimated noise ceiling values for participants included in Harry Potter dataset (Wehbe et al., 2014a). To exclude noisy voxels, we selected, for each participant, those with noise ceiling estimates above 0.05. 

Figure 8: Voxel-wise estimated noise ceiling values for participants included in Moth Radio Hour dataset (Deniz et al., 2019). To exclude noisy voxels, we selected, for each participant, those with noise ceiling estimates above 0.05. 17 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

# D BERT M ISALIGNMENT ON HARRY POTTER DATASET 

We report the brain alignment results for Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving trained with data from each participant in Figure 9, as well as a quantitative summary in Figure 10. Figure 11 report the quantitative summary for brain alignment for the Brain Tuned model compared to Brain Pre-serving model. Results for the Holmes benchmark for all the comparisons are reported in Figure 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. 18 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026   

> Brain Preserving Brain Misaligned Difference

Figure 9: Performances of BERT-based Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving models on the Harry Potter dataset at the brain alignment task. Brain plots show voxel-wise Pearson correlations between model activations and brain responses for each subject. The left column displays results for the Brain Preserving model, the center column for the Brain Misaligned model, and the right column shows their difference (Preserving minus Misaligned). Warmer colors indicate stronger alignment with brain activity. These results illustrate the distribution of brain alignment across subjects and highlight areas where brain misalignment has effects. 19 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Figure 10: Median Pearson correlation for BERT-based models on the Harry Potter dataset for each participant. Brain Misaligned models perform significantly worse than Brain Preserving models for seven subjects ( p < 0.05 , indicated by * and assessed using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test). 

Figure 11: Median Pearson correlation for BERT-based models on the Harry Potter dataset for each participant. Brain Preserving models perform significantly worse than Brain Tuned models for six subjects ( p < 0.05 , indicated by * and assessed using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test). 20 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 12: Average win rate and standard error of the BERT-based Brain Misaligned and Brain Pre-serving models on the Harry Potter dataset across participants and tasks (Left) and across different linguistic subfields (Right). The win rate indicates how often each model outperforms its counterpart across tasks and participants. The Brain Preserving model significantly outperforms the Brain Mis-aligned model ( p < 0.001 , indicated by ***), as assessed using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Left). This result suggests that removing brain alignment negatively influences linguistic competence. The Brain Preserving model shows a significantly higher win rate in all the linguistic subfield (Right) (p < 0.05 , Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction), suggesting that improving brain alignment affects all linguistic subfields. 

Figure 13: Average win rate with standard error across various linguistic phenomena for the BERT-based Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving models on the Harry Potter dataset. Each bar repre-sents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. 21 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 14: Average win rate and standard error of the BERT-based Brain Preserving and Brain Tuned models on the Harry Potter dataset across participants and tasks (Left) and across different linguistic subfields (Right). The win rate indicates how often each model outperforms its counterpart across tasks and participants. The Brain Tuned model significantly outperforms the Brain Preserving model (p < 0.001 , indicated by ***), as assessed using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Left). This result suggests that improving brain alignment positively influences linguistic competence. The Brain Tuned model shows a higher win rate in the syntax, semantics, reasoning, morphology and discourse subfield (Right) and significantly higher for all linguistic subfields ( p < 0.05 , Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction), suggesting that improving brain alignment affects all linguistic subfields. 

Figure 15: Average win rate with standard error across various linguistic phenomena for the BERT-based Brain Preserving and Brain Tuned models on the Harry Potter dataset. Each bar represents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. 22 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 16: Average win rate and standard error of the BERT-based Brain Tuned and Pretrained models on the Harry Potter dataset across participants and tasks (Left) and across different linguistic subfields (Right). The win rate indicates how often each model outperforms its counterpart across tasks and participants. The Brain Tuned model shows a higher win rate in the morphology subfield (Right) (although Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction reveal no signifi-cance), suggesting that improving brain alignment affects this linguistic subfield. 

Figure 17: Average win rate with standard error across various linguistic phenomena for the BERT-based Brain Tuned and Pretrained models on the Harry Potter dataset. Each bar represents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. 23 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

# E BERT M ISALIGNMENT ON MOTH RADIO HOUR DATASET 

We report the brain alignment results for Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving trained with data from each participant in Figure 18, as well as a quantitative summary in Figure 19. Figure 20 report the quantitative summary for brain alignment for the Brain Tuned model compared to Brain Preserving model. Results for the Holmes benchmark for all the comparisons are reported in Figure 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. 24 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026   

> Brain Preserving Brain Misaligned Difference

Figure 18: Performances of BERT-based Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset at the brain alignment task. Brain plots show voxel-wise Pearson correlations between model activations and brain responses for each subject. The left column displays results for the Brain Preserving model, the center column for the Brain Misaligned model, and the right column shows their difference (Preserving minus Misaligned). Warmer colors indicate stronger alignment with brain activity. These results illustrate the distribution of brain alignment across subjects and highlight areas where brain misalignment has effects. 25 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Figure 19: Median Pearson correlation for BERT-based models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset for each participant. Brain Misaligned models perform significantly worse than Brain Preserving models for six subjects ( p < 0.05 , indicated by * and assessed using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test). 

Figure 20: Median Pearson correlation for BERT-based models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset for each participant. Brain Preserving models perform significantly worse than Brain Tuned models for five subjects ( p < 0.05 , indicated by * and assessed using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test). 26 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 21: Average win rate and standard error of the BERT-based Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset across participants and tasks (Left) and across different linguistic subfields (Right). The win rate indicates how often each model outperforms its counterpart across tasks and participants. The Brain Preserving model significantly outperforms the Brain Misaligned model ( p < 0.01 , indicated by **), as assessed using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Left). This result suggests that removing brain alignment negatively influences linguistic compe-tence. The Brain Preserving model shows a higher win rate in the syntax, semantics, reasoning and discourse subfield (Right) and significantly higher for syntax and semantics subfields ( p < 0.05 ,Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction), suggesting that removing brain align-ment particularly affects syntax and semantic tasks. 

Figure 22: Average win rate with standard error across various linguistic phenomena for the BERT-based Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset. Each bar represents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Brain Preserving models tend to outperform Brain Misaligned models, particularly in categories such as genericity and quantifiers. Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. 27 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 23: Average win rate and standard error of the BERT-based Brain Preserving and Brain Tuned models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset across participants and tasks (Left) and across dif-ferent linguistic subfields (Right). The win rate indicates how often each model outperforms its counterpart across tasks and participants. The Brain Tuned model significantly outperforms the Brain Preserving model ( p < 0.001 , indicated by ***), as assessed using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Left). This result suggests that improving brain alignment positively influences linguistic com-petence. The Brain Tuned model shows a higher win rate in the syntax, semantics, morphology and discourse subfield (Right) and significantly higher for syntax, semantics and morphology subfields (p < 0.05 , Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction), suggesting that improving brain alignment affects those linguistic subfields. 

Figure 24: Average win rate with standard error across various linguistic phenomena for the BERT-based Brain Preserving and Brain Tuned models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset. Each bar repre-sents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. 28 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 25: Average win rate and standard error of the BERT-based Brain Tuned and Pretrained models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset across participants and tasks (Left) and across different linguistic subfields (Right). The win rate indicates how often each model outperforms its counterpart across tasks and participants. The Brain Tuned model significantly outperforms the Pretrained model (p < 0.05 , indicated by *), as assessed using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Left). This result suggests that improving brain alignment positively influences linguistic competence. The Brain Tuned model shows a higher win rate in the syntax subfield (Right) and significantly higher for syntax subfield (p < 0.05 , Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction), suggesting that improving brain alignment affects that linguistic subfield. 

Figure 26: Average win rate with standard error across various linguistic phenomena for the BERT-based Brain Tuned and Pretrained models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset. Each bar represents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. 29 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

# F GPT2 M ISALIGNMENT ON HARRY POTTER BRAIN DATA RESULTS 

We report the brain alignment results for Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving trained with data from each participant in Figure 27, as well as a quantitative summary in Figure 28. Figure 29 report the quantitative summary for brain alignment for the Brain Tuned model compared to Brain Preserving model. Results for the Holmes benchmark for all the comparisons are reported in Figure 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. 30 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026   

> Brain Preserving Brain Misaligned Difference

Figure 27: Performances of GPT2-based Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving models on the Harry Potter dataset at the brain alignment task. Brain plots show voxel-wise Pearson correlations between model activations and brain responses for each subject. The left column displays results for the Brain Preserving model, the center column for the Brain Misaligned model, and the right column shows their difference (Preserving minus Misaligned). Warmer colors indicate stronger alignment with brain activity. These results illustrate the distribution of brain alignment across subjects and highlight areas where brain misalignment has effects. 31 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Figure 28: Median Pearson correlation for GPT2-based models on the Harry Potter dataset for each participant. Brain Misaligned models perform significantly worse than Brain Preserving models for seven subjects ( p < 0.05 , indicated by * and assessed using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test). 

Figure 29: Median Pearson correlation for GPT2-based models on the Harry Potter dataset for each participant. Brain Preserving models perform significantly worse than Brain Tuned models for two subjects ( p < 0.05 , indicated by * and assessed using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test). 32 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 30: Average win rate and standard error of the GPT2-based Brain Misaligned and Brain Pre-serving models on the Harry Potter dataset across participants and tasks (Left) and across different linguistic subfields (Right). The win rate indicates how often each model outperforms its counter-part across tasks and participants. The Brain Preserving model outperforms the Brain Misaligned model (significance assessed using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test reveal p = 0 .055 ) (Left). This re-sult suggests that removing brain alignment negatively influences linguistic competence. The Brain Preserving model shows a higher win rate in particular in the semantics and syntax subfield (Right) (although Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction reveal no significance), sug-gesting that removing brain alignment particularly affects semantics and syntax processing tasks. 

Figure 31: Average win rate with standard error across various linguistic phenomena for the GPT2-based Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving models on the Harry Potter dataset. Each bar repre-sents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. 33 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 32: Average win rate and standard error of the GPT2-based Brain Preserving and Brain Tuned models on the Harry Potter dataset across participants and tasks (Left) and across different linguistic subfields (Right). The win rate indicates how often each model outperforms its counterpart across tasks and participants. The Brain Tuned model significantly outperforms the Brain Preserving model ( p < 0.001 , indicated by ***), as assessed using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Left). This re-sult suggests that improving brain alignment positively influences linguistic competence. The Brain Tuned model shows a higher win rate in the syntax, semantics, reasoning, morphology and discourse subfield (Right) and significantly higher for syntax and morphology subfields ( p < 0.05 , Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction), suggesting that improving brain alignment af-fects those linguistic subfields. 

Figure 33: Average win rate with standard error across various linguistic phenomena for the GPT2-based Brain Preserving and Brain Tuned models on the Harry Potter dataset. Each bar represents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. 34 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 34: Average win rate and standard error of the GPT2-based Brain Tuned and Pretrained mod-els on the Harry Potter dataset across participants and tasks (Left) and across different linguistic sub-fields (Right). The win rate indicates how often each model outperforms its counterpart across tasks and participants. The Brain Tuned model shows a higher win rate in the reasoning and discourse subfield (Right) and significantly higher for discourse subfield ( p < 0.05 , Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction), suggesting that improving brain alignment affects that linguistic subfield. 

Figure 35: Average win rate with standard error across various linguistic phenomena for the GPT2-based Brain Tuned and Pretrained models on the Harry Potter dataset. Each bar represents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. 35 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

# G GPT2 M ISALIGNMENT ON MOTH RADIO HOUR DATASET 

We report the brain alignment results for Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving trained with data from each participant in Figure 36, as well as a quantitative summary in Figure 37. Figure 38 report the quantitative summary for brain alignment for the Brain Tuned model compared to Brain Preserving model. Results for the Holmes benchmark for all the comparisons are reported in Figure 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44. 36 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026   

> Brain Preserving Brain Misaligned Difference

Figure 36: Performances of GPT2-based Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset at the brain alignment task. Brain plots show voxel-wise Pearson correlations between model activations and brain responses for each subject. The left column displays results for the Brain Preserving model, the center column for the Brain Misaligned model, and the right column shows their difference (Preserving minus Misaligned). Warmer colors indicate stronger alignment with brain activity. These results illustrate the distribution of brain alignment across subjects and highlight areas where brain misalignment has effects. 37 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Figure 37: Median Pearson correlation for GPT2-based models on Moth Radio Hour dataset for each participant. Brain Misaligned models perform significantly worse than Brain Preserving models for 3 subjects ( p < 0.05 , indicated by * and assessed using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test). 

Figure 38: Median Pearson correlation for GPT2-based models on Moth Radio Hour dataset for each participant. Brain Preserving models perform significantly worse than Brain Tuned models for six subjects ( p < 0.05 , indicated by * and assessed using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test).  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 39: Average win rate and standard error of the GPT2-based Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset across participants and tasks (Left) and across different linguistic subfields (Right). The win rate indicates how often each model outperforms its counterpart across tasks and participants. The Brain Preserving model shows a higher win rate (Right) in the semantics and morphology subfield (although Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction reveal no significance), suggesting that removing brain alignment particularly affects semantics and morphology tasks. 38 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Figure 40: Average win rate with standard error across various linguistic phenomena for the GPT2-based Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset. Each bar represents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Brain Preserving models tend to outperform Brain Misaligned models, particularly in categories such as genericity, event structure and binding. Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. 39 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 41: Average win rate and standard error of the GPT2-based Brain Preserving and Brain Tuned models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset across participants and tasks (Left) and across different linguistic subfields (Right). The win rate indicates how often each model outperforms its counterpart across tasks and participants. The Brain Tuned model significantly outperforms the Brain Preserving model ( p < 0.001 , indicated by ***), as assessed using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Left). This result suggests that improving brain alignment positively influences linguistic competence. The Brain Tuned model shows a higher win rate in the syntax, semantics, reasoning, morphology and discourse subfield (Right) and significantly higher for syntax, semantics, reasoning and discourse subfields ( p < 0.05 , Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction), suggesting that improving brain alignment affects those linguistic subfields. 

Figure 42: Average win rate with standard error across various linguistic phenomena for the GPT2-based Brain Preserving and Brain Tuned models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset. Each bar repre-sents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. 40 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 43: Average win rate and standard error of the GPT2-based Brain Tuned and Pretrained models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset across participants and tasks (Left) and across different linguistic subfields (Right). The win rate indicates how often each model outperforms its counter-part across tasks and participants. The Brain Tuned model significantly outperforms the Pretrained model ( p < 0.001 , indicated by ***), as assessed using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Left). This re-sult suggests that improving brain alignment positively influences linguistic competence. The Brain Tuned model shows a higher win rate in the syntax, semantics, reasoning, morphology and discourse subfield (Right) and significantly higher for reasoning and discourse subfields ( p < 0.05 , Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction), suggesting that improving brain alignment af-fects those linguistic subfields. 

Figure 44: Average win rate with standard error across various linguistic phenomena for the GPT2-based Brain Tuned and Pretrained models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset. Each bar represents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. 41 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

# H LLAMA MISALIGNMENT ON HARRY POTTER DATASET 

We report the brain alignment results for Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving trained with data from each participant in Figure 45, as well as a quantitative summary in Figure 46. Figure 47 report the quantitative summary for brain alignment for the Brain Tuned model compared to Brain Preserving model. Results for the Holmes benchmark for all the comparisons are reported in Figure 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53. 42 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026   

> Brain Preserving Brain Misaligned Difference

Figure 45: Performances of Llama-based Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving models on the Harry Potter dataset at the brain alignment task. Brain plots show voxel-wise Pearson correlations between model activations and brain responses for each subject. The left column displays results for the Brain Preserving model, the center column for the Brain Misaligned model, and the right column shows their difference (Preserving minus Misaligned). Warmer colors indicate stronger alignment with brain activity. These results illustrate the distribution of brain alignment across subjects and highlight areas where brain misalignment has effects. 43 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Figure 46: Median Pearson correlation for Llama-based models on the Harry Potter dataset for each participant. Brain Misaligned models perform significantly worse than Brain Preserving models for seven subjects ( p < 0.05 , indicated by * and assessed using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test). 

Figure 47: Median Pearson correlation for Llama-based models on the Harry Potter dataset for each participant. Brain Preserving models perform significantly worse than Brain Tuned models for seven subjects ( p < 0.05 , indicated by * and assessed using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test). 44 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 48: Average win rate and standard error of the Llama-based Brain Misaligned and Brain Pre-serving models on the Harry Potter dataset across participants and tasks (Left) and across different linguistic subfields (Right). The win rate indicates how often each model outperforms its counterpart across tasks and participants. The Brain Preserving model significantly outperforms the Brain Mis-aligned model ( p < 0.001 , indicated by ***), as assessed using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Left). This result suggests that removing brain alignment negatively influences linguistic competence. The Brain Preserving model shows a higher win rate in the syntax, semantics, reasoning, morphology and discourse subfield (Right) and significantly higher for syntax and semantics subfields ( p < 0.05 ,Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction), suggesting that removing brain align-ment particularly affects syntax and semantic tasks. 

Figure 49: Average win rate with standard error across various linguistic phenomena for the Llama-based Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving models on the Harry Potter dataset. Each bar repre-sents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. 45 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 50: Average win rate and standard error of the Llama-based Brain Preserving and Brain Tuned models on the Harry Potter dataset across participants and tasks (Left) and across different linguistic subfields (Right). The win rate indicates how often each model outperforms its counterpart across tasks and participants. The Brain Tuned model significantly outperforms the Brain Preserving model ( p < 0.001 , indicated by ***), as assessed using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Left). This result suggests that improving brain alignment positively influences linguistic competence. The Brain Tuned model shows a higher win rate in the syntax, semantics, reasoning, morphology and discourse subfield (Right) and significantly higher for syntax, semantics and morphology subfields (p < 0.05 , Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction), suggesting that improving brain alignment affects all linguistic subfields. 

Figure 51: Average win rate with standard error across various linguistic phenomena for the Llama-based Brain Preserving and Brain Tuned models on the Harry Potter dataset. Each bar represents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. 46 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 52: Average win rate and standard error of the Llama-based Brain Tuned and Pretrained mod-els on the Harry Potter dataset across participants and tasks (Left) and across different linguistic sub-fields (Right). The win rate indicates how often each model outperforms its counterpart across tasks and participants. The Brain Tuned model significantly outperforms the Pretrained model ( p < 0.001 ,indicated by ***), as assessed using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Left). This result suggests that im-proving brain alignment positively influences linguistic competence. The Brain Tuned model shows a higher win rate in the syntax, semantics and reasoning subfields (Right) and significantly higher for semantics and syntax subfields ( p < 0.05 , Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction), suggesting that improving brain alignment affects those linguistic subfields. 

Figure 53: Average win rate with standard error across various linguistic phenomena for the Llama-based Brain Tuned and Pretrained models on the Harry Potter dataset. Each bar represents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. 47 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

# I LLAMA MISALIGNMENT ON MOTH RADIO HOUR DATASET 

We report the brain alignment results for Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving trained with data from each participant in Figure 54, as well as a quantitative summary in Figure 55. Figure 56 report the quantitative summary for brain alignment for the Brain Tuned model compared to Brain Preserving model. Results for the Holmes benchmark for all the comparisons are reported in Figure 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62. 48 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026   

> Brain Preserving Brain Misaligned Difference

Figure 54: Performances of Llama-based Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset at the brain alignment task. Brain plots show voxel-wise Pearson corre-lations between model activations and brain responses for each subject. The left column displays results for the Brain Preserving model, the center column for the Brain Misaligned model, and the right column shows their difference (Preserving minus Misaligned). Warmer colors indicate stronger alignment with brain activity. These results illustrate the distribution of brain alignment across sub-jects and highlight areas where brain misalignment has effects. 49 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

Figure 55: Median Pearson correlation for Llama-based models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset for each participant. Brain Misaligned models perform significantly worse than Brain Preserving models for eight subjects ( p < 0.05 , indicated by * and assessed using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test). 

Figure 56: Median Pearson correlation for Llama-based models on the Harry Potter dataset for each participant. Brain Preserving models perform significantly worse than Brain Tuned models for three subjects ( p < 0.05 , indicated by * and assessed using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test). 50 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 57: Average win rate and standard error of the Llama-based Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset across participants and tasks (Left) and across different linguistic subfields (Right). The win rate indicates how often each model outperforms its counterpart across tasks and participants. The Brain Preserving model significantly outperforms the Brain Misaligned model ( p < 0.001 , indicated by ***), as assessed using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Left). This result suggests that removing brain alignment negatively influences linguistic competence. The Brain Preserving model shows a higher win rate in the syntax, reasoning, mor-phology and discourse subfield (Right) and significantly higher for syntax and morphology subfields (p < 0.05 , Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction), suggesting that removing brain alignment particularly affects syntax and morphology tasks. 

Figure 58: Average win rate with standard error across various linguistic phenomena for the Llama-based Brain Misaligned and Brain Preserving models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset. Each bar represents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. 51 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 59: Average win rate and standard error of the Llama-based Brain Preserving and Brain Tuned models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset across participants and tasks (Left) and across dif-ferent linguistic subfields (Right). The win rate indicates how often each model outperforms its counterpart across tasks and participants. The Brain Tuned model significantly outperforms the Brain Preserving model ( p < 0.001 , indicated by ***), as assessed using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Left). This result suggests that improving brain alignment positively influences linguistic com-petence. The Brain Tuned model shows a higher win rate in the syntax, semantics and discourse subfields (Right) and significantly higher for syntax and semantics subfields ( p < 0.05 , Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction), suggesting that improving brain alignment af-fects those linguistic subfields. 

Figure 60: Average win rate with standard error across various linguistic phenomena for the Llama-based Brain Preserving and Brain Tuned models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset. Each bar repre-sents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. 52 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 61: Average win rate and standard error of the Llama-based Brain Tuned and Pretrained models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset across participants and tasks (Left) and across different lin-guistic subfields (Right). The win rate indicates how often each model outperforms its counterpart across tasks and participants. The Brain Tuned model significantly outperforms the Pretrained model (p < 0.01 , indicated by **), as assessed using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test (Left). This result sug-gests that improving brain alignment positively influences linguistic competence. The Brain Tuned model shows a higher win rate in the syntax, semantics, reasoning and discourse subfield (Right) and significantly higher for syntax ( p < 0.05 , Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction), suggesting that improving brain alignment affects this linguistic subfield. 

Figure 62: Average win rate with standard error across various linguistic phenomena for the Llama-based Brain Tuned and Pretrained models on the Moth Radio Hour dataset. Each bar represents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. .53 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026 

# J AVERAGED COMPARISONS : A DDITIONAL RESULTS 

Figure 63: Averaged win rate with standard error for all model and dataset combinations across various linguistic phenomena of the Brain Tuned and Brain Preserving models. Each bar represents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Brain Tuned models tend to outperform Brain Preserving models, particularly in categories such as filler gap and negative polarity item licensing . Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. 54 Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026  

> A) All tasks B) Tasks split by linguistic subfield

Figure 64: Averaged win rate and standard error for all the model and dataset combinations of the Brain Tuned and Pretrained models across tasks (Left) and across different linguistic subfields (Right). The win rate indicates how often each model outperforms its counterpart across tasks and participants. The Brain Tuned models outperform the Pretrained models (Left). This result suggests that train to align with brain recording leads to improvement in linguistic competence. The Brain Tuned model shows a higher win rate in the syntax and semantics subfields (Right) (although Wilcoxon signed-rank test with Holm-Bonferroni correction reveal no significance), suggesting that removing brain alignment particularly affects those tasks. 

Figure 65: Averaged win rate and standard error for all the model and dataset combinations of the Brain Tuned and Pretrained models across different linguistic phenomena (Right). Each bar represents the average win rate for a specific linguistic phenomenon, with error bars indicating standard error. Brain Tuned models tend to outperform Pretrained models. Some concrete examples of the linguistic tasks are provided in the Table 2. 55