Title: 2604.14694v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.14694v1

Published Time: Fri, 17 Apr 2026 00:36:02 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
1

# Robust Evaluation of Neural Encoding Models 

# via ground -truth approximation 

Giovanni M. Di Liberto 1,2,3    

> 1School of Computer Science and Statistics, University of Dublin, Trinity College, Ireland; ADAPT Centre
> 2Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
> 3Trinity Centre for Biomedical Engineering, Ireland

Correspondence:  gdiliber@tcd.ie 

Conflicts of interest: none declared. 

Funding sources: This research was supported by Research Ireland at ADAPT, the Research Ireland Centre for 

AI -Driven Digital Content Technology at Trinity College Dublin and University College Dublin 

[13/RC/2106_P2]. For the purpose of Open Access, the author has applied a CC BY -NC -ND public copyright 

licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission. 

Acknowledgements: I thank Prof. Edmund C. Lalor for useful feedback on the results and for suggesting the 

use of the match -vs -mismatch validation metric ; Dr. Simon Geirnaert for excellent discussions on this metric 

and alternative approaches; I thank Mrs. Claire Donohue , Dr. Aaron Nidiffer , and the members of my research 

team at Trinity College Dublin for useful scientific discussion s around the ideas at the core of this manuscript. 

I thank Yannick Peters for his work on the Open Data explorer and the list of datasets on the website 

https://diliberg.net . I thank the colleagues at the CNSP open -science initiative (https://cnspworkshop.net )

for contributing to some of the resources used in this study, especially Jessica M. Alexander for the 

conversion of the GwilliamsSpeechMEG dataset s to CND . Thanks to all the colleagues that have agreed to 

share their datasets publicly, contributing to this study and much more research in the future (please find a 

full list in Table 1 ). 

Word count abstract: 150 .

Word count (excluding abstract, title page , references and methods ): 5059 .2

Abstract 

Encoding models enable measurement of how our brains represent sensory inputs using electro - and 

magneto -encephalography (MEEG). Evaluating how closely encoding model s reflect the underlying brain 

functions is a crucial premise for model interpretation and hypothesis testing . However, the ground -truth 

neural activity is unknown, preventing model evaluation with respect to the target neural signal. Existing 

evaluation metrics must therefore relate model’s predictions to noisy MEEG measurements , where most 

variance is stimulus -unrelated . Here, I introduce an evaluation framework where model predictions are 

compared to a ground -truth approximation , obtained by aligning MEEG signals with prediction s using 

canonical correlation analysis and via participant averaging. The resulting metric (CPA -PA) yields single -

participant evaluation s outperforming conventional sco res by ~300 -1000 % on synthetic EEG data and ~250 %

on 34 real MEEG data sets (818 datapoints) . These gains reflect increased sensitivity to stimulus -relevant 

neural activity and reduced dependence on SNR , establish ing ground -truth approximation as a robust 

framework for evaluating encoding models. 3

# Main 

Encoding models have become central to studying how the human brain represents sensory information 

using electro - and magneto -encephalography (MEEG). By predicting neural responses from stimulus 

features, these models allow quantification of neural encoding strength , representational structure, and 

computational transformations from sensory inputs to higher -level abstractions 1-6. However, evaluating 

these models remains challenging due to the substantial noise of MEEG signals, where only a small fraction 

of sensor -level variance reflects stimulus -driven activity 7. As a result, standard evaluation metrics , typically 

Pearson ’s or Spearman’s correlation between predicted and recorded time -series , underestimat ing model 

performance. Improved evaluation metrics could lead to a clearer understanding of brain functions, 

especially when considering that MEEG recordings can be particularly noisy on certain participant cohorts 

(e.g., infants) , tasks (e.g., involving movement), or technology (e.g., low -cost systems with low SNR) . This 

study takes a step in that direction by introducing an evaluation framework for encoding models that informs 

on the model quality looking past the MEEG noise. 

Sensory neuroscience widely adopts l inear time -invariant (LTI) encoding models , as they offer a numerically 

stable, interpretable, and computationally efficient framework for linking multivariate stimuli to neural 

responses. The relative simplicity of these models, however, has also been blamed for their limited ability to 

explain MEEG v ariance. Here, I propose that LTI encoding models may have been systematically undervalued 

in sensory neuroscience research due to the fundamental limitations of conventiona l evaluation metrics ,

underestimat ing the extent to which these models capture sensory -relevant neural activity . This study 

presents a framework that solves that issue by comparing MEEG predictions with an approximation of the 

ground -truth neural signal , informing on the actual model’s explanatory power through a noise -robust 

evaluation . The ground -truth approximation is obtained through Canonical Prediction Alignment ( CPA ),

which suppressed stimulus -irrelevant signal s in the MEEG recording by aligning model predictions and neural 

data using a Canonical Correlation Analysis (CCA) mapping ( Fig. 1a ). The MEEG signal can be further denoised 

via Participant Averaging ( PA ) when stimuli are shared across participants ( Fig. 1b ). Encoding models fitted 

on the original data are then evaluated against the resulting ground -truth approximation ( CPA -PA ). 

The effectiveness of CPA and CPA -PA is explored using the LTI encoding model known as the Temporal 

Response Function (TRF), due to its wide use in continuous sensory experiments across sensory modalities 2,8 -

> 15

. Note that CPA can be applied to any encoding model 16,17 , as the procedure aligns MEEG signals to their 

prediction , leaving the model itself untouched . The validation of CPA and CPA -PA is carried out systematically 

on both synthetic and real MEEG data , considering 800 synthetic participants in total, and 34 MEEG datasets ,

with 818 datapoints overall . Part of the validation is carried out on synthetic data, where the ground -truth 

signal is known and there is full control over the level of noise. Ground -truth signal s were generated as the 

convolution of an artificially -built impulse response with the sound envelope from a widely studied 

audiobook -listening EEG dataset ( LalorNatSpeech 18 ). A realistic TRF waveform was obtained by modelling the 

impulse response as a sum of Gaussian components with timing and amplitude corresponding to the P1 –N1–

P2 matching empirical measurements 19 . Noise consisting of randomly selected EEG chunks was added to the 

resulting ground -truth signal. Real d atasets were standardised and processed in a consistent manner, 

combining publicly available dataset with new unpublished data. 

This study provides three main contributions . First, it demonstrates the effectiveness of evaluating encoding 

model s via ground -truth approximation, introducing the CPA and CPA -PA metrics. Second, it reveals that 

conventional evaluation metrics severely underestimate the model’s predictive power , with CPA -PA 4

enhancing MEEG prediction correlation scores by ~300 -1000 % and ~ 250 % on synthetic and real neural 

recordings respectively (Fig. 1 c,f). These gains are more than a simple rescaling of correlation scores, as 

comparable increases were also measured for signal detectability (ability to classify matching versus 

mismatching stimulus -MEEG segments; Fig. 1d,g ). Additional analyses are then carried out at the single -

participant level, revealing that CPA can retrieve neural encodings where conventional metrics fail ( Fig. 2d -

right ). These results are found to be consistent across 34 datasets (31 EE G, 2 MEG, 1 fNIRS; Fig. 1 e;

Supplementary Fig. 1), all pre -processed and analysed in the same manner . This brings us to the third 

contribution : A new publicly available resource including standardised datasets and code 

(https://osf.io/c76p8/overview i), includ ing both previously published and new datasets, with tasks such as 

speech listening and production, music listening and imagery, video and sign language watching, selective 

auditory attention, and involving adult, children, and infant participants ( Table 1 and Supplementary Table 

1). 

# Results 

# Validation on synthetic data 

First, the effectiveness of the CPA and CPA -PA evaluation metrics is tested on univariate encoding models 

applied to SyntheticEEG -1, comprising six datasets for different SNR levels, each with 30 simulated 

participants . T he stimulus -EEG mapping is studied by considering a single stimulus feature , t he speech 

envelope , which was selected due to its wide adoption 19 -22 and its availability across all the considered 

datasets ii . For any given participant , the CPA and CPA -PA correlation score s (R -CPA and R -CPA -PA ) are 

compared with a conventional EEG prediction correlation score , where a single score is derived by averaging 

prediction correlations across all MEEG channels (R -AVG). Results are also reported for the channel with 

highest prediction correlation (R -MAX) , where the optimal channel is determined with cross validation, 

test ing if R -CPA is superior to the prediction correlation at any single channel. All evaluation scores were 

calculated on held -out folds that were not included on the TRF and CCA model fit (see Online Methods ).

As hypothesised, CPA evaluation was more sensitive to the neural ground -truth signal than the conventional 

evaluation metrics , leading to EEG prediction correlation gains for R -CPA over R -MAX of 4%, 24%, 127%, 

331%, 506%, and 1012% , for SNRs 0, -10, -20, -30, -40, and -50 dB respectively , calculated as (R -CPA - R-

MAX)/R -MAX (Fig. 1c ). Even larger gains emerged for R -CPA -PA over R -MAX of 4%, 27%, 150%, 516%, 938%, 

3241%. The result was confirmed by a two -way repeated -measures ANOVA with factors Metric (R-AVG, R -

MAX, R -CPA, and R -CPA -PA ) and SNR (6 levels). The analysis revealed robust main effects of Metric 

(F(3, 87) = 6023.6, p = 9.4×10 -101 ), SNR (F(5, 145) = 696.8, p = 1.8×10 -99 ), and a Metric × SNR interaction 

(F(15, 435) = 1374.3, p < 10 -101 ). Post hoc tests confirmed that R-CPA -PA > R -CPA (FDR -corrected paired two -

tailed Wilcoxon signed -rank test, p < 10 -3 for all SNRs ), and R-CPA > R -MAX for all SNRs (p < 10 -5), except SNR 

50 (p = 0.063; exact p -values and effect sizes are reported in the supplementary data ).    

> isee also Open Data section in https://diliberg.net
> ii A visual equivalent of the sound envelope, the instantaneous visual change, was used on the Sign Language datasets

5

To verify that these gains reflect improved sensitivity to the task -relevant neural signal rather than a simple 

numerical rescaling, we quantified signal detectability using a match -vs -mismatch framework 23 -25 . This 

framework is grounded in the intuition that a good encoding model should generate predictions that more 

closely resemble the neural response corresponding to the correct stimulus segment (“match”) than the 

responses associated with a randomly selected stimulus segment (“mismatch”). Signal detectability 

calculated  over 5-second segment s (Fig. 1d ) confirm s the trends measured for EEG prediction correlation 

metrics. Specifically, numerical results indicate  EEG prediction correlation gains for R -CPA over R-MAX of 0%, 

0%, 1%, 43 %, 257 %, 3550 % for SNRs 0, -10, -20, -30, -40, and -50 dB respectively (Fig. 1 d), with larger gains 

when comparing R -CPA -PA with R -MAX of 0%, 0%, 1%, 44%, 343%, 9235 %. A two -way repeated -measures 

ANOVA revealed robust main effects of Metric (F(3, 87) = 1458.6 , p = 3.0×10 -74 ), SNR (F(5, 145) = 234 .96 ,

p = 1. 2×10 -67 ), and a Metric × SNR interaction (F(15, 435) = 428 .0, p < 10 -249 ). Post hoc tests confirmed that R -

CPA -PA > R -CPA for SNRs -30dB (FDR -corrected paired two -tailed Wilcoxon signed -rank test, p = 2.2 ×10 -4), -

40dB ( p = 1.7 ×10 -6), and -50dB ( p = 2.0×10 -4), while no statistically significant effect was measured for SNRs 

where signal detectability was saturating close to 100% accuracy i.e., 0dB (p = 1 ), -10dB ( p = 1), -20dB ( p =

0.063 ). Post hoc tests also indicated that R-CPA > R -MAX for all SNRs more difficult than -10dB (p < 10 -3 for 

all comparisons) , apart from SNRs 0dB ( p = 1) and -10dB ( p = 1), where accuracy was close to 100% for both 

metrics. 

# Real -data validation : Encoding models achieve substantially higher signal 

# detectability than previously recognised 

Univariate encoding models were run on 34 real MEEG data sets (Fig. 1e ; Table 1 ) demonstrating that , for a 

given encoding model, R-CPA and R -CPA -PA evaluation metrics produce larger correlation scores (Fig. 1f ) and 

signal detectability ( Fig. 1 g) than the conventional metrics R-AVG and R -MAX . An average MEEG prediction 

correlation gain of 68% was measured for R -CPA over R -MAX , with an e ven larger gain of 252 % when 

comparing R-CPA -PA over R -MAX . The result was confirmed by a one -way repeated -measures ANOVA with 

the factor Metri c (R-AVG, R -MAX, R -CPA ) and 34 datasets, reveal ing robust main effects of Metric (F(2, 66 ) = 

61. 1, p = 9. 6×10 -16). Post hoc tests confirmed that R -CPA > R -MAX ( FDR -corrected paired two -tailed Wilcoxon 

signed -rank test, p = 4.0 ×10 -7; effect -size -r = 0.87 ). A separate repeated -measures ANOVA was run for 

comparing R -CPA -PA with the other metrics, as that metric could only be calculated on a subset of data where 

participants were presented with the same stimuli (21 datasets) . A statistically significant effect of Metri c (R-

AVG, R -MAX, R -CPA, R -CPA -PA ) was detected (F(3, 60) =  59 .8, p = 5.1×10 -18). Post hoc tests confirmed that 

R-CPA -PA > R -CPA (p = 6.9×10 -5; effect -size -r = 0.8 8). 

Consistent with the correlation analysis, R-CPA and R -CPA -PA showed substantial improvements in Signal 

Detectability over conventional metrics (Fig. 1 g), with gains over R -MAX of 71% and 210% for R -CPA and R -

CPA -PA respectively, confirming the trends seen for the prediction correlations. These gains reflected a 

statistically significant effect of Metri c (R-AVG, R -MAX, R -CPA ) on the 34 datasets (F(2, 66 ) =  73 .2, p = 1.8×10 -

> 17

). Post hoc tests confirmed that R -CPA > R -MAX ( FDR -corrected paired two -tailed Wilcoxon signed -rank test, 

p = 9.6×10 -7; effect -size -r = 0.8 6). A statistically significant effect of Metri c (R-AVG, R -MAX, R -CPA, R -CPA -PA )

was also detected when considering R -CPA -PA on the corresponding 21 datasets (F(3, 60 ) = 1520 .9,

p = 1.8×10 -25 ). Post hoc tests confirmed that R -CPA -PA > R -CPA ( p = 1.2×10 -4; effect -size -r = 0.88). 6

# Retrieving neural signatures at the single -participant level 

To test whether CPA enhances the recovery of neural variables of interest at the single -participant level, a 

second synthetic dataset was constructed (SyntheticEEG -2; N=50 ), designed to dissociate SNR -driven 

variability from meaningful differences in neural encoding . Unlike the previous simulation , individuals within 

each SNR group ha d variable SNR values (mean  ± 2.5 dB, uniformly sampled ). This makes it possible to 

quantify the sensitivity of each evaluation metric to difference in SNR between participants . The simulated 

EEG signal consisted of a combination of neural responses to the speech envelope and to word onsets, 

generated from spatially distinct neural sources ( Fig. 2a ). Crucially, the strength of the word -onset response 

was modulated by a scaling factor β. For the sake of a simple intuition, β can be regarded as a proxy of 

individual language proficiency, such that higher proficiency corresponds to a stronger neural response to 

word ons ets. This design enables a direct test of whether a given evaluation metric is primarily sensitive to 

SNR variability, or whether it can reliably capture meaningful differences in neural signals associated with β. 

Multivariate f orward TRFs were fit to capture the mapping from speech envelope and word onsets to the 

synthetic EEG data . Visual inspection indicates that averaging the TRF weights across all 50 participants leads 

to an accurate retrieval of the envelope and word onset temporal response functions that were injected in 

the synthetic data (Fig. 2b ). When reducing the number of participants to 10, the envelope TRF can still be 

retrieved at all SNR levels, while a more difficult and imprecise retrieval emerges at the more challenging 

SNR levels ( -40 and -50 dB). This qualitative observation is quantified by measuring the correlation between 

the target variable β and the TRF value for lag 400ms at Pz , where the word onset component was artificially 

centred. Strong correlations were detected for SNRs 0 dB ( r = -0.76, p = 10 -10 ), -10 dB ( r = -0.74, p = 8×10 -10 ),

-20 dB ( r = -0.7 9, p = 6×10 -12), and -30 dB ( r = -0. 69 p = 3×10 -8), with significant yet decreasing correlations at 

the more challenging SNRs -40 dB ( r = -0. 46 p = 9×10 -4) and -40 dB ( r = -0. 28 p = 0.05 ). This indicates that the 

encoding models remain sensitive to the neural variable of interest β despite the high levels of noise . While 

that ability to retrieve neural responses of interest is encouraging, do conventional evaluation metrics exploit 

that ability in full or are they a limiting factor in what TRFs can do? 

# Discerning sensory -related neural sources with CPA 

Multivariate TRFs derived for SyntheticEEG -2 were evaluated with R -AVG, R -MAX, R -CPA, and R -CPA -PA . The 

numerical results indicate that CPA and CPA -PA exhibit greater sensitivity to sensory -related neural signal s,

allow ing model explanatory power to be detected across all SNR levels , even in conditions where 

conventional metrics fail to reveal any relationship (see SNR= −50dB in Supplementary Fig. 3 ). This increased 

sensitivity provides a more reliable criterion for determining whether an encoding model can be interpreted 

neurophysiologically or not, thereby extending the applicability of encoding models such as forward TRFs to 

more challenging neural recordings. 

In addition to serving as that critical threshold , evaluation metrics have also been proven useful approaches 

for determining if neural signals encode a certain stimulus feature of interest 5,19,24 and its encoding strength 

(e.g., envelope tracking) 26 -31 . An additional analysis was carried out on SyntheticEEG -2 to determine if the 

parameter β, which directly scales to word -onset TRF weights, could also be recovered using forward -model 

evaluation scores. Multivariate TRF s fit using both speech envelope and word onset were evaluated by 

predict ing EEG in held -out data using word onset alon e. Performance was quantified using EEG prediction 

correlation at the best channel (R -MAX -PARTIAL) and compared with R -CPA computed on the first two 

canonical components (R -CPA comp 1 and R -CPA comp 2), under the hypothesis that the two simulated neural 

sources would be disentangled across canonical components . As expected, R-CPA (i.e., R -CPA comp 1) and R-7

CPA comp2 exhibited spatial patterns consistent with envelope -related and word -onset -related TRF s, 

respectively (Fig. 2 d). Bothg R-MAX partial -x2 and R-CPA comp2 showed strong correlation s with β (up to r ≈ 0.8) ,

but with a critical distinction: R -MAX partial -x2 performed best at high SNRs (0 and -10 dB), whereas R-CPA comp 2

consistently outperformed all other metrics at more realistic low -SNR levels ( -20 to -50 dB ; Fig. 2d ). With 

regard to sensitivity to SNR, R -MAX showed a large dependency on SNR fluctuations, with correlations up to 

r ≈ 0.7. Instead, R -CPA had typically either comparable or lower values, never going past r ≈ 0.4 (Fig. 2d ).

A similar analysis was carried out on the LalorNatSpeech (audio -book listening task) and LalorRevSpeech 

(tim e-reverse speech listening) da tasets, expecting the former to exhibit neural signatures of both acoustic 

(envelope) and lexical (word -onset) processing and the latter to encode acoustic but not lexical processing. 

As expected and in line with previous work 4,19 , when considering R -MAX, a mixed -effects ANOVA reveal ed a

statistically significant main effect of feature (F(1, 54 ) =  9.6 , p = 3.5×10 -14) and a feature × group interaction 

(F(1, 54 ) =  4.6 , p = 0.036 ), with no main effect of group (F(1,54 ) =  0.5 , p = 0.467 ). Post hoc analyses 

confirm ed a statistically significant between -group difference in lexical encoding ( Wilcoxon rank -sum test, p

= 0.0124 ; effect -size -r = 0.46 ), with no statistically significant group difference for acoustic features ( p =

0.2240 ; effect -size -r = -0.2 3). When considering R-CPA , a statistically significant main effects of component 

(F(1, 54 ) =  47 .7, p = 5.8×10 -9) and the between -group effect approaching statistical significant (F(1, 54 ) =  3.2,

p = 0.0 79 ), with no feature × group interaction (F(1, 54 ) =  0. 02 , p = 0. 865 ). Post hoc tests confirm a 

statistically significant group difference in CC2 ( lexical spatial pattern) (p = 0. 0261 ; effect -size -r = 0.4 1), with 

no statistically significant group difference emerged for CC1 ( acoustic spatial pattern) (p = 0.2240 ; effect -size -

r = 0.23). 

# Relating CPA with direct CCA modelling 

CPA is built via a CCA mapping between the model predictions and the actual neural signal, which is then 

tested on held -out data. When the encoding model is a forward TRF, CPA can be seen as a concatenation of 

a TRF transformation W, a CCA forward model A, and a CCA backward model B. Since all these 

transformations are linear, this can be mathematically equivalent to a direct CCA mapping under certain 

conditions (see Discussion ). There are some caveats in that regard, as both TRFs and CCA in this study include 

Ridge regularisation. Nonetheless, it is intuitive to understand that a CCA mapping , in particular the CCA -1

(lags are applied to the stimulus) mapping as defined by de Cheveigné and colleagues 32 , should lead to 

correlation scores close or identical to R -CPA . This comparison was carried out on SyntheticEEG -2 (-30 dB) 

and LalorNatSpeech , in both cases revealing very similar correlations scores for R -CPA and CCA -1 across all 

components, who were outperformed by CCA -2 across all canonical components (lags applied to stimulus 

and EEG) . Interestingly, the highest correlation was achieved by R-CPA -PA, whose first canonical component 

outperformed all other models ( Fig. 2f ). 

The advantage of CPA over CCA mappings lies primarily in its conceptual and methodological separation 

between model estimation and model evaluation. CPA enables a more accurate evaluation of encoding 

models like the TRF, without altering the model. This means combining the good qualities of TRFs (such as its 

interpretability and stability ) and CCA (such as its strong denoising quality ), with little risks . In contrast, direct 

CCA approaches yield high correlation scores at the expense of interpretability, as stimulus -related 

information is distri buted across a larger number of components, particularly in more complex mappings 

such as CCA -2 ( Fig. 2f ). CPA and CCA -1, instead, capture most of the stimulus -related neural signal with two 

components with the synthetic data, and three -four components on the real data. 8

An additional drawback of direct CCA mappings is their increased susceptibility to overfitting. In CPA, the CCA 

transformation operates without time -lag expansion and within the same sensor space, whereas CCA -1 and 

CCA -2 directly map stimulus features to neural data through high -dimensional lagged representations, 

including features of heterogeneous type. This increased model flexibility can substantially elevate overfitting 

risk relative to the more constrained TRF + CCA architecture used in CPA. Consistent with this hypothesis, 

CPA and CCA -1 were compared across 16 MEEG datasets involving continuous speech listening. Overfitting 

was quantified as the difference between training and test correlation for the first canonical component. 

CCA -1 exhibited significantly greater overfitting (M = 0.063, SD = 0.024) than CPA (M = 0.044, SD = 0.027; 

t-test, p = 0.014). 

# Discussion 

This study introduces a ground -truth approximation framework for the robust evaluation of encoding 

models. Compared with conventional evaluation metrics, this framework represents a substantial 

methodological advance, yielding evaluation scores that are orders of magnitude higher ( Fig. 1c,f ) and 

demonstrating enhanced sensitivity to task -related neural signals ( Fig. 1d,e ; Fig. 2d ). Central to this 

framework is the CPA metric, where model performance is assessed in a denoised canonical space and 

thereby offers substantially increased sensitivity to stimulus -relevant neural activity. CPA -PA further 

enhances signal detectability in experimental designs involving shared stimuli by leveraging cross -participant 

consistency, at the cost of introducing assumptions about group homogeneity. Together, these metrics 

establish a general, add -on evaluation strategy that can be seamlessly integrated into existing encoding 

pipelines. 

# The benefit of increased signal detectability 

The ground -truth approximation evaluation indicate that LTI encoding models reported in the literature are 

far more effective at capturing sensory -related neural signals than previously suggested (Fig. 1g ;

Supplementary Fig. 1 and 2 ). Importantly, this improvement does not arise from changes to the encoding 

models themselves, but from a re -evaluation of the same model predictions using a more sensitive metric. 

As such, encoding models from earlier studies can be re -analysed using CPA or CPA -PA without re -es timating 

model weights. But what are the specific reasons making this increased signal detectability desirable? 

Model evaluation is crucial for interpreting encoding models, as meaningful analysis of model weights is 

typically restricted to cases where statistical significance is reached. Model weights obtained from fits that 

do not exceed the significance threshold should not be trusted instead, as there is no guarantee that they 

reflect explainable, sensory -related neural activity 1. However, SNR is a primary factor underlying the low 

evaluation scores produced by conventional metrics such as R -AVG and R -MAX (Fig. 1c,d ; Fig. 2c,d ). The 

consequence is that these metrics can fail to detect explainable sensory -related neural activity in low -SNR 

data , even when a model is , in fact, capturing valuable sensory neural activity (as observed for the SNR= -

50dB condition in SyntheticEEG -2; Fig. 2c and Supplementary Fig. 3 ). 

By increasing signal detectability, the proposed framework unlocks the use of encoding models in challenging 

datasets that were previously inaccessible , including datasets with low SNR or short recording durations due 

to the particular population (e.g., infants 13,33 -35 ), the task ( e.g., interactive paradigms such as conversations 36 -

> 38

), and experimental settings (e.g., recordings collected “in -the -wild” 39 ). One important consideration is that 9

the most challenging datasets, where conventional evaluation metrics might have failed, are seldom publicly 

available . Yet these are precisely the conditions under which the strongest gain in signal detectability are 

likely to emerge, as illustrated by the analyses on the synthetic EEG data .

An important implication is that models previously considered insensitive to sensory -related information may 

in fact encode meaningful task -related signals, thereby justifying a closer examination of their learned 

weights and spatial -temporal structure. This was the case for low -SNR synthetic data , where R-AVG and R -

MAX had chance -level (~50%) signal detectability , suggesting that the model fails to capture any sensory 

neural signal of interest (Supplementary Figure 3 ). On the same model, instead, CPA -PA indicates a much 

higher signal detectability ( ~74% ), revealing that the model captures valuable sensory neural signal ( which 

was the case by construction , as quantified in Fig. 2c ). A similar pattern also emerged in real EEG recordings 

from infants, where CPA -PA revealed sensitivity to sensory signals where conventional metrics failed to 

detect reliable relationship s ( Supplementary Fig. 1 )34 .

The proposed framework also increases the sensitivity to meaningful single -participant variability. As 

illustrated by the β -factor manipulation in Fig. 2 , CPA preserves inter -individual differences more reliably 

than standard metrics, enabling finer -grained examination of participant -specific neural encoding properties. 

This is particularly relevant for developmental, clinical, or heterogeneous populations , where inter -individual 

variability is of primary scientific interest. 

# Why re -evaluating the same model instead of using a “better” model altogether 

Previous work has attempted to address the low sensitivity of encoding model evaluations by adopting 

alternative model mappings, including more el aborate regression frameworks 40 , CCA 41 , and deep learning 

(primarily focussing on envelope decoding however) 17,42 . However, a key motivation for the present approach 

is to optimise the evaluation metric of any given encoding model that one might intend to use. For example, 

TRFs have several desirable properties, including robustness, a small number of hyperparameters, rapid 

computation and, most importantly, ease of interpretability 2. In many domains of sensory neurophysiology, 

interpretability is a non -negotiable requirement. The ground -truth approximation framework is therefore 

conceived as an add -on evaluation layer, rather than a replacement for established encoding models. This 

allows researchers to select a model structure that best serves their theoretical goals (e.g., TRFs for 

interpretability) , while still benefiting from substantially improved evaluation sensitivity. 

Alternative approaches like deep learning enables non -linear mappings at the cost of a more challeng ing 

model fit , parameter tuning , and interpretability. A successful workaround is instead to overcome linearity 

constraint s by using LTI models after elaborate non -linear features extraction procedures (e.g., using 

LLMs) 19,43,44 . An alternative approach that can yield high correlation scores is CCA, which offers a conceptually 

elegant combination of encoding and decoding models , which are calculated simultaneously as a

multivariate -to -multivariate mapping 23 . However , that comes at the cost of an increase d model complexity 

compared to a simpler LTI encoding model, with a more challenging model interpretation and a higher risk 

of overfitting (see Fig. 2f and the Result section “ Relating CPA with direct CCA modelling ”).

Intermediate solutions have been attempted such as b ack -to -back regression 40 , which also combines 

encoding and decoding models, but as a chain. F orward models are evaluated by measuring how well MEEG 

predictions can reconstruct each stimulus feature , where the latter is estimated using decoding models. 

While this evaluation can be effective — because correlations are computed in stimulus space, where the 

ground -truth signal is known — this approach inherits key limitations of decoding models. First, evaluation 10 

scores are computed separately for each stimulus feature separately (a multivariate -to -univariate mapping), 

providing multiple scores instead of a single value. Second, the reconstruction scores are calculated for 

features that can be quite different in nature (e.g., continuous versus discrete) , thus producing scores that 

may not be directly comparable. This is because reconstruction correlation depends , in addition to neural 

encoding strength , to the temporal structure, sparsity, and dynamic range of the stimulus feature itself, all 

of which differ substantially across feature type (e.g., sound envelope and word onsets) .

CPA solve s that issue by leaving the encoding model untouched, thus maintaining its original interpretability ,

and by carrying out the model evaluation in a denoised MEEG space approximating the neural ground -truth 

signal . In doing so, CPA combines the desired benefits of CCA and back -to -back regression, while 

circumventing their shortcomings. CPA -PA pushes even further by enhancing the ground -truth 

approximation, leading to substantial gains in signal detectability. 

# Ground -truth approximation: Design choices and alternatives 

The aim of evaluation via ground -truth approximation is to derive metrics that are more strongly correlated 

with the underlying task -related neural activity. The results presented here confirm that CPA achieves this 

goal across all scenarios considered. Ne vertheless, it is important to reflect on the specific design choices for 

CPA and PA , and whether those influence how the results should be interpretat ed . CPA operates under the 

same assumptions as conventional evaluation of encoding models . Its advantage arises from evaluating 

predictions in a denoised canonical space , achieved via a direct CCA mapping , thus via spatial filtering (similar 

to the well -known independent component analysis , but where the spatial maps are derived to maximise 

stimulus -neural correlation s) . This entails the assumption that noise and task -related neural sources can be 

separated primarily along the s patial dimension. 

In principle, the denoising could be further strengthened by incorporating temporal filtering or time -lagged 

representations 23 . However, this would further increase the risk of overfitting and lead to a broader 

informational spread across canonical components (e.g., CCA -2 in Fig. 2f ), complicating interpretability. As 

such , the present study opted for a lag -free CCA mapping, yielding a solution that is effective, stable, 

interpretable, and computationally efficient .

The PA operation introduces a qualitatively different assumption, namely that neural activity is consistent 

across the participant cohort. While such an assumption is often part of ERP/ERF or TRF reporting, it directly 

affects single -participant evaluation by quantifying alignment with participant -averaged neural activity and 

attenuating sensitivities to participant -specific neural reactions . This becomes particularly relevant when 

comparing groups 31,45 -47 , as R-CPA -PA is influenced by within -group homogeneity , highlighting the 

importance of also reporting metrics insensitive to group homogeneity, such as R -CPA, or explicitly 

quantifying homogeneity using complementary measures such as inter -subject correlation 48 . A

methodologically more elegant solution is multiway CCA 49 , which identifies components that are maximally 

correlated across participants . A key distinction is that PA assumes a shared set of spatial maps across all 

participants , whereas multiway CCA allows participant -specific spatial maps. This makes multiway CCA a 

more flexible framework , albeit at the cost of increased computational complexity and a larger 

hyperparameter space . Future work may explore integrating multiway CCA in to the ground -truth 

approximation procedure. 11 

# Measuring neural tracking 

In sensory neurophysiology , neural tracking is a central concept for understanding how continuous sensory 

streams are represented and processed in the brain. Over the last decade, i nput –output modelling 

approaches, including encoding and decoding models, have become widely used for measuring neural 

tracking 50 . Neural tracking varies across cortical sources and scalp locations, making forward models well 

suited to this task in principle . However, the low correlation values produced by conventional evaluation s

(Fig. 1c ; Supplementary Fig. 1,2 ) and their strong dependence on SNR variability (e.g., Fig. 2d ) have led many 

studies to rely instead on decoding models 29,50 -54 . Neural tracking is then quantified as the ability to 

reconstruct a stimulus feature such as the speech envelope (i.e., envelope tracking) from distributed neural 

activity. 

Model interpretation, however, cannot be carried out in the decoding direction . Many studies therefore 

combine decoding and encoding approaches, using decoding models to establish the presence of neural 

tracking and forward encoding models to interpret spatial or temporal weights 55 -58 . This practice entails 

interpreting parameters of a model that was not used to quantify the underlying effect. Partial solutions, 

such as mathematically transforming decoding weights into an encoding space, have been proposed, but are 

often overlooked in favour of fitting separate models. That can be partly solved by deriving the equivalent 

encoding weights from the decoder mathematically 59 .

A further limitation of decoding -based neural tracking is that it typically addresses one feature at a time, 

which is problematic for analyses involving multiple, mixed -type features such as spectrotemporal 

representations, phonetic features, or higher -level linguistic variables (e.g., lexical surprise or entropy). 

Forward encoding models naturally accommodate mixed -type feature spaces and enable comparisons within 

a unified neural space. By addressing the issue of low evaluation scores, the ground -truth ap proximation 

framework enables robust measurement of neural tracking using a single forward encoding model, thereby 

unifying estimation and interpretation within the same modelling framework. 

# Beyond EEG and LTI models 

The proposed ground -truth approximation methodology is inherently flexible, as it is only requires model 

predict ions and the acquired neural signal for implementing CPA and CPA -PA . As such , it can be applied to 

any encoding model architecture and is not restricted to LTI models or to specific types of input features. 

While most demonstrations in this study focus on EEG, the framework is also validated on MEG and fNIRS 

data . That validation was carried out with configurations that are appropriate across all dataset considered, 

enabling their direct comparison (Supplementary Fig. 1 and 2 ). While some exceptions were made (for 

example, slower temporal dynamics were considered with fNIRS), f utur e work should explore further 

technology specific configurations, such as higher frequency rates in MEG or source space analysis. Similarly, 

the majority of the data considered involved listening tasks , as that represents the majority of the publicly 

available data to date. To also explore the effectiveness of CPA and CPA -PA beyond listening paradigms ,

additional datasets are considered, with new datasets shared , with tasks including speech production, 

receptive sign language, comedy show watching , and music imagery 60,61 .

# A new standardised resource for sensory neurophysiology 

Another major contribution of this work is the release of a new standardised open resource comprising 34 

MEEG and fNIRS datasets, together with all analysis code used in this study (https://osf.io/c76p8/overview ,

https://diliberg.net ). By combining previously published and newly shared datasets spanning speech listening 12 

and production, music perception and imagery, sign language, video watching , and selective attention ,

including adult, child, and infant participants , this resource enables large -scale, reproducible comparisons of 

encoding models and evaluation metrics under uniform preprocessing and analysis choices. 13 

# Online Methods 

# Technical details of CPA and CPA -PA 

Encoding models fit on a given subset of a dataset (fold 1) are conventionally evaluated by building MEEG 

signal predictions on left -out data (folds -2) and then measuring MEEG prediction correlations, which inform 

on the variance explained by the model. The evaluation framework presented here consists of comparing the 

model’s predictions with a ground -truth neural signal, instead of the actual MEEG signal. This achieved by 

adding two additional steps: Canonical Prediction Alignment (CPA) and Participant Averaging (PA). Together, 

these methodologies produce a ground -trut h approximation that, when compared with the MEEG 

predictions, informs on the model’s ability to capture stimulus -relevant neural activity, diminishing the 

sensitivity to stimulus -irrelevant noise. 

The first additional step is CPA: a CCA mapping 23 is fit on fold -2 to project MEEG signals and their predictions 

into a shared latent space where they are maximally aligned ( Fig. 1a ). Given a third fold unseen by both the 

encoding model and the CCA (fold -3), MEEG predictions are generated using the encoding model (previously 

fit on fold -1), and both the predicted and real MEEG signals are projected into the shared latent space using 

the CCA model (previously fit on fold -2). The CPA score is computed as the Pearson correlation at the first 

canonical compon ent (CC), where stimulus -related activity is maximised. 

Note that the description above uses the labels fold -1, fold -2, and fold -3 for conceptual clarity. In practice, 

these roles are achieved within a full nested cross validation loop, where the specific fold assignments differ 

at each iteration. This nested loop scheme optimise s data usage and ensure stable model estimation. Nested 

cross -validation avoids the optimistic bias that arises when the same data are used for both hyperparameter 

selection and performance estimation 62,63 . In this case, hyperparameter selection involved both the encoding 

model and the CCA (find the list of hyperparameters in the respective subsections). 

The second addition to the evaluation procedure is PA: MEEG signals from multiple participants is time -

aligned and averaged on fold -2 and fold -3. The encoding model fit in fold -1 is evaluated as for CPA, with the 

difference that the model predictions in fo ld -2 and fold -3 are compared with MEEG data after participant 

averaging. PA was introduced (albeit without naming it) in a previous study as a solution for increasing signal 

detectability in EEG responses to nursery rhymes in infants and adults 34 , building on previous research on a 

related approach 64 and inspired by methods attempting to isolate a ground -truth neural signal by combining 

data from multiple participants 49 . In practice, PA denoises the MEEG recording, reducing the influence of 

signals that are stimulus -irrelevant and inconsistent across participants. Together, CPA and PA inform on the 

encoding model’s sensitivity to stimulus -relevant neural activity via a g round -truth approximation ( Fig. 1b ). 

One caveat must be noted for PA: it is only applicable in datasets where each given stimulus is presented to 

more than one participant and, ideally, where all participants are presented with the same stimuli (regardless 

of the presentation order). As such, this study presents results for both CPA, which is universally applicable, 

and CPA -PA, which applies to a subset of datasets (in this case, 2 1 out of 34 datasets). 

Inputs and outputs 

Inputs and outputs, typically stimulus features and neural responses respectively, are represented as 

multivariate time -series matrices X ( T × d₁) and Y ( T × d₂ ), where T denotes the number of time samples. 

Inputs and outputs must be temporally aligned and (down)sampled at identical rates. The framework 14 

supports mixed feature types, including continuous and temporally -sparse. While the neural signal typically 

consists of continuous time -series, the possibility of using mixed data types gives important flexibility when 

selecting the stimulus features (e.g. , speech envelope, word onsets). Note that most analyses in this study 

were carried out using the sound envelope feature, as that was available across all datasets (except the two 

sign language datasets, where the sound envelope was replaced by its visual equivalent – instantaneous 

visual change 65 ). 

Encoding model – the Temporal Response Function 

The encoding model used here to analyse the mapping between stimulus features and MEEG signal is known 

as the temporal response functions (TRF) framework 9,15,66 . A TRF can be interpreted as a filter describing a 

linear time -invariant (LTI) transformation from X to Y, i.e., 

Y(t) = TRF * X(t), 

where * represents the convolution operator. TRFs were estimated using lagged ridge regression, where 

the input X lags ∈ ℝTˣ(d1·K) , comprises the stimulus features X ∈ ℝTˣd1 , including K time -lagged versions of 

those features over a pre -determined time -lag window where the neural response is expected. In this 

study, the time -lag window was fixed at [ -100, 600] ms (except with the PodcastListening_fNIRS dataset, 

where [ -2,10] seconds was used to capture the slow dynamics of the hemodynamic response). 

The TRF performs a multivariate -to -univariate mapping, meaning that a TRF is fit at each channel separately, 

returning model weights corresponding to each feature and time -lag. The weights w ∈ ℝd1 ˣK are derived to 

minimise the mean -squared error (MSE) between the predicted neural response and the measured EEG 

signal. Specifically, for the stimulus matrix Xlags and the neural response vector y at a given channel in Y, t he 

ridge estimator solves the minimisation problem :

ŵ = argmin w (|| y − X lags w ||² + λ || w ||² ), 

where λ is the L2 regularisation parameter and || y – X w ||² is the squared prediction error, while || w||² 

penalises large coefficients. The identity matrix is defined as I ∈ ℝ(d1·K) ˣ(d1·K) . Here, t he optimisation problem 

is solved with the closed -form formula: 

ŵ = (X ᵀ X + λ I)⁻¹ X ᵀ y

which yields the set of TRF weights across all time -lags and stimulus features for each channel. The 

regularisation parameter of the ridge regression ( λ) is determined via cross validation, exploring the range of 

values from 10 -2 to 10 6 with logarithmic steps. 

TRFs offer two views into the input -output relationship. The first view involves evaluating the strength of the 

X-Y mapping, which is typically quantified as the correlation between Y and its prediction on left -out folds 

with leave -one -out cross -validatio n. Here, MEEG prediction correlations were obtained using the Pearson’s 

correlation score, returning one R -value for each MEEG channel. The score R-AVG is the average MEEG 

prediction correlation value across all channels. In this study, I also define the R-MAX score, which is the 

MEEG prediction correlation at the best -performing channel. To control for overfitting, the optimal channel 

index was selected within the inner loop of the nested scheme, and evaluated on held -out data in the outer 

loop. 15 

Canonical Prediction –MEEG Alignment (CPA) 

CPA evaluates encoding models by aligning predicted and recorded neural responses in a shared latent space 

derived through CCA. The CPA algorithm is implemented as follows: 

a)  For each cross validation step in the outer loop, one MEEG segment is held out for evaluation (fold -3). 

b)  For each step in the inner loop, one MEEG segment is held out (fold -2). The TRF models is fit on the 

remaining MEEG data (fold -1) and then used to build predictions on fold -2. The optimal value of λ is 

selected based on R -AVG in fold -1. This process is rep eated for another selection of folds 1 and 2, until 

MEEG predictions are built for all MEEG segments in the inner loop. 

c)  After completion of the inner loop for the TRF model fit and MEEG prediction, a ridge regularised CCA 

mapping is fit between the TRF -derived MEEG predictions and the actual MEEG recordings. Before doing 

that, the optimal regularisation parameter ( λCCA ) is determined via a second cross validation inner loop. 

The search was constrained to the small set [1,10,100] for computational reasons. Note that, differently 

from the TRF and conventional CCA methods for stimulus -EEG mappings 32 , the CCA mapping here did not 

include any time -shifts, as its purpose is to spatially align signals that are already time -aligned and in the 

same domain. 

d)  Correlations are calculated for each CC. In univariate models (using only one stimulus feature), R -CPA is 

the correlation at the first CC, where the stimulus -related variance is strongest. In multivariate models, 

multiple spatial maps are possible. As such, this study also reports correlations at multiple CCs (e.g., R -

CPA -CC1, R -CPA -CC2). 

CPA -PA: Ground -truth approximation via participant averaging 

CPA -PA extends CPA by replacing fold -3 single -participant neural data with an averaged neural time -series 

obtained across participants, providing a high -SNR approximation of the stimulus -driven neural response. 

This way, the same models as before (fit on single -participant data) can be evaluated on a ground -truth 

approximation achieved by both single -participant CCA and group -averaging produc ing a single -participant 

CPA -PA score. CCA dimensionality was kept full -rank. Future work may explore dimensionality reduction to 

optimi se efficiency. 

Signal detectability metrics 

The concept of s ignal detectability is based on the intuition that a good encoding model should produce 

prediction that more closely resemble the neural response recorded for the correct stimulus segment 

(“match”) than for unrelated segments (“mismatch”). These match -vs -mismatch comparisons were 

performed for each of the four evaluation metrics considered i.e., R -AVG, R -MAX, R -CPA, and R -CPA -PA, after 

partitioning the MEEG data into 5 -second long segments (except for the BabyRhythmCambridge datasets, 

where a window of 3 -seconds was used to ensure a sufficient number of segments, due to the short duration 

of certain experimental trials). The resulting match -vs -mismatch classification accuracy is referred to as signal 

detectability , where 50% is the ideal chance level and the maximum score is 100%. A h igh signal detectability 

score reflects the model’s ability to detect stimulus -relevant neural structure against the background noise .

Signal detectability gains were calculated as : 

> 𝑆𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑎𝑙𝐷𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑅 −𝐶𝑃𝐴 −𝑆𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑎𝑙𝐷𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑅 −𝑀𝐴𝑋
> 𝑆𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑎𝑙𝐷𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑎𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑅 −𝑀𝐴𝑋 −𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑎𝑙𝐶 ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝐿𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑙

.16 

# Realistic Synthetic data 

SyntheticEEG -1

Synthetic EEG data sets were built to test the ability of the encoding models and the evaluation metrics to 

retrieve stimulus -relevant information from neural recordings. Data was generated for each six different 

signal -to -noise rations (SNR) to determine how model performance are affected by the noise level, exploring 

SNRs of 0, –10, –20, –30, –40, and –50 dB . Thirty simulated participants were built for each SNR level. 

Synthetic EEG ground -truth signals ( y1) were generated as the convolution of the sound e nvelope from a 

widely studied audiobook -listening EEG dataset ( LalorNatSpeech 18 ; see Real MEEG datasets section) with a 

synthetic realistic TRF 1 waveform , which was obtained by modelling the impulse response as a sum of 

Gaussian components with timing and amplitude corresponding to the P1 –N1–P2 components matching 

empirical measurements based on low -frequency (1 -8 Hz) EEG 19 . Specifically, the parameters used are 

reported as triplets i.e., ( amplitude [arbitrary units] , latency [ms ], width [ms] ): P1 (1, 40, 15 ), N1 (−2, 90, 

20), P2 (1.5, 150, 25) . The final synthetic EEG signal was obtained by adding n oise (yn) to the synthetic 

ground -truth, with noise consisting of randomly selected segments of low -frequency (1 -8 Hz) EEG data (from 

the LalorNatSpeech dataset) . To includes the spatial dimension, EEG noise was assigned to 64 scalp locations 

according to the standard BioSemi maps. Centring at the scalp location Fz, the ground -truth neural signal was 

assigned to the synthetic EEG with magnitude diminishing for sens ors that are further away from Fz, wit h a 

rapid decay via the formula  𝑦 (𝑐 ℎ) = 𝑦 1 · 1 

> 4distance 𝐹𝑧 ,𝑐 ℎ

+ 𝑦 𝑛 . Thirty minutes of synthetic data was generated 

for each simulated participant, organised in ninety -second trials corresponding to different segments of the 

audiobook. 

SyntheticEEG -2

A similar procedure was followed for building a richer synthetic EEG dataset with two s peech features from 

LalorNatSpeech : speech envelope (x₁ ) and word onsets (x₂ ). Each feature was convolved with a corresponding 

synthetic TRF waveform TRF 1 and TRF 2 to produce simulated neural signals y₁ and y₂ . The final synthetic EEG 

(y) combines real EEG noise ( yₙ ) with these simulated signals (y1 + y2). Six datasets (N=50 each) were created 

at mean SNRs of 0, –10, –20, –30, –40, and –50 dB, each with ±2.5 dB SNR variabil ity (via the value α, which 

is randomly sampled from a uniformly distribution [ -2.5,2.5] for each simulated participant ) and adjustable 

x₂ encoding strength (β ∈ [0.02, 1]). This way, the multivariate synthetic EEG dataset can be used to study 

the ability of the encoding model to tease apart the neural representation of stimulus features of interest, as 

well as the sensitivity of the model to variations at the level of single participants, such as changes in SNR 

and β (which could be intuitively related with factors such as language proficiency in this simulation). Spatial 

maps were creating using the same spatial decay formula as for the univariate synthetic EEG, with y1 cent red 

in Fz and y2 centred in Pz ( Fig . 2a ). Thirty minutes of synthetic data was generated for each of the fifty 

simulated participant in each SNR group, resulting in 150 hours of simulated data in total. 

# Real MEEG datasets 

The metrics presented in this study are tested on 34 datasets, comprising 31 EEG and 2 MEG experiments. 

An dataset recorded with functional Near -Infrared Spectroscopy (fNIRS) was also included, offering insights 

into the validity of the results on infrared -based hemodynamic measurements, which are substantially slower 

but, nonetheless, sensitive to neural auditory responses 67 . For simplicity, the full set of data used in this 

manuscript is referred to as Real MEEG datasets , albeit imprecisely as that also includes one fNIRS dataset. 17 

Overall, the datasets include data from 573 participants, some of which were recorded across multiple 

sessions (e.g., GwilliamsSpeechMEG -1 and 2) or across different tasks that were stored as different datasets 

(e.g., Conversation Listening and Speaking), leading to 818 datapoints overall. 

Tasks include listening, selective auditory attention, speaking, watching, and auditory imagery, with stimuli 

including speech (e.g., audiobooks, podcasts), vocoded speech, sung speech, music, sign language, and audio -

visual material. The majority of the p articipants were young adults with no history of neurological 

impairment. In addition, data from children and infants (193 datapoints) is included ( Table 1 ). In the majority 

of the datasets, experiments were carried out in a dark room. Participants were pr esented with auditory or 

visual stimuli while instructed to minimise motor movements. Auditory material included audiobooks, 

podcast recordings, MIDI melodies, sung speech. Video material included sign language recordings, infant -

directed speech stories, a nd comedy show recordings. The full list of MEEG data sets, with links to the data 

and relevant papers, is available in Supplementary Table 1 , and has also been shared at the link 

https://diliberg.net  (‘Open Data’ section) . All data was collected in accordance with the Declaration of 

Helsinki and was approved by local Ethics Committee s. Each participant provided written informed consent. 

Further details on each datasets can be found at the links to the repository and relevant papers 

# Data preprocessing 

Analyses were conducted with MATLAB 2021a by using custom scripts developed starting from previous 

analysis scripts from my own work shared publicly as part of the CNSP initiative (Cognition and Natural 

Sensory Processing;  https://cnspworkshop.net ; see section Data and Code Availability for further details).  All 

dataset were preprocessed with the same procedure, with the exception of PodcastListeningfNIRS , with filter 

cut -off frequencies and TRF time -lag window that were suitable for capturing the slow dynamics of 

hemodynamic responses. 

EEG and MEG data were low -pass filtered at 8 Hz by means of zero -phase shift Butterworth filters with order 

2 (by using the filtering functions in the CNSP resources) to include the Δ - and Θ -bands . EEG data were also 

high -pass filtered at 1 Hz to reduce noise and downsampled by an integer ratio to 32 or 25 Hz , depending on 

whether the original sampling frequency was a multiple of 2 (e.g., 512 Hz) or 10 (e.g., 500 Hz) . Note that 

synthetic datasets were also preprocesse d with the same procedure, with the only difference that the 

filtering operation was only applied to the EEG noise. The synthetic TRFs used to generate the signal , instead, 

were already incorporating that filtering operation, since they were built to resemble real TRFs from filtered 

data from the LalorNatSpeech dataset .

Channels with excessive noise were identified and interpolated via spherical interpolation, if they were three 

standard deviations away from the mean. EEG signals only were then re -referenced to the average of all 

channels . Continuous stimulus features were rescaled by dividing their values by the standard deviation 

calculated on each feature separately. Discrete stimulus features that were indicator variables with values 

one did not require a rescaling. All other discrete s timulus features were rescaled si milar to the continuous 

stimulus features, but only by considering the non -zero values when calculating the standard deviation. 

Continuous MEEG signals were rescaled by dividing their values by the standard deviation after flattening the 

matrix across cha nnel and time -samples dimensions, producing a rescaled X and Y that have comparable 

deviation, while preserving the relative magnitude across MEEG channels.  All preprocessing operations were 

also repeated for the  Δ- (0. 5-4Hz) and Θ - (4 -8 Hz) bands separate ly .18 

# Validation procedure 

Validation of the ground -truth approximation procedure was carried out on univariate encoding models, by 

comparing the R -CPA and R -CPA -PA metrics with the conventional R -AVG and also with R -MAX, using both 

MEEG prediction correlations and signal detectabil ity measurements. Multivariate models required a more 

elaborate procedure, which was aimed at determining the ability of the CPA procedure to retrieve model 

parameters of interest (i.e., β) while controlling for the sensitivity to SNR. 

Retrieving neural signatures at the single -participant 

The multivariate analysis in this study was designed to test the encoding model’s ability to recover neural 

signatures of interest at single -participant level. TRF models were fit to map both the speech envelope and 

word onsets to the neural recordings. Th ese two stimulus features are known to correlate with neural activity 

arising from at least two distinct spatial generators: the speech envelope typically predicts responses 

strongest over centro -temporal scalp regions, whereas word onset are also associat ed with responses over 

centro -parietal channels 4,28 . As such, this framework provides a suitable testbed for evaluating whether the 

encoding model can differentiate between two distinct neural sources. 

CPA naturally returns multiple spatial components without requiring changes to the procedure. In contrast, 

the conventional evaluation approach required adaptation. Specifically, after fitting TRF models using both 

stimulus features simultaneously, predict ions were generated using one feature at a time while partialling 

out the contribution of the other i.e., by setting the corresponding feature vector to zero. The R -MAX score 

derived from predictions based on word onsets (with envelope -related activity par tialled out) is referred to 

as R -MAX -PARTIAL ( Fig. 2d ). 

The resulting metrics R-MAX -PARTIAL (reflecting isolated word -onset responses), R -CPA -CC1, and R -CPA -CC2 

(expected to reflect the envelope and word -onset activity respectively) were then correlated with β and SNR. 

An ideal evaluation metric would show a large correlation with the target variable β while remaining 

uncorrelated with fluctuations in SNR. 

Comparison with conventional CCA and overfitting assessment 

To better understand CPA, conventional CCA mappings are also fit in this study. This study adopts the CCA -1

and CCA -2 approaches as defined by de Cheveigné and colleagues 23 . CCA -1 performs a direct CCA mapping 

between X lags and Y, where the time -lags were applied to X but not Y. CCA -2 also applies the time -lags to Y, 

increasing the flexibility of the model. Specifically, CCA -1 rotates neural signal using spatial maps, thus 

constraining the transformation to signals that can be discriminated spatially. By adding the time -lags, CCA -

2 enables separation of components by considering spatio -temporal transformations, increasing the rank and 

leading to a more powerful mapping with r egard to variance explained. However, that flexibility comes at 

the cost of an increased risk of overfitting and a reduced interpretability. 

This study includes an overfitting assessment, signal detectability was derived on the training and test folds 

for CPA, CCA -1, and CCA -2. A small degree of overfitting would lead to similar scores in the training and test 

folds, while a large overfitting w ould lead to high training scores and low test scores. Based on that rationale, 

an overfitting index was derived by subtracting signal detectability on the training and test folds at the 

individual participant level. The overfitting index was derived on a subset of the Real MEEG datasets, 

comprising 16 datasets with consistent task (listening), type of stimuli (continuous speech), and cohort 

(neurotypical adults). Specifically, the following datasets were included: LalorNatSpeech, Lalor Rev Speech, 19 

AliceSpeech, MEGspeechGwilliams -1, MEGspeechGwilliams -2, PodcastListeningEEG, Trust Speech ,

SparrKULee1, SparrKULee 2, VocodedSpeech , ConversationListening , CocktailAttSwitch, AAD_KULeuven, 

Emotion Speech , FDSpeech_L1, FDSpeech_L2 

# Statistical analysis 

All statistical analyses directly comparing the metrics (R -AVG, R -MAX, R -CPA, R -CPA -PA) were performed 

using repeated measures ANOVA, with F-values reported as F(df time , df error ) when the assumptions of 

normality and sphericity were met. Those assumptions were tested with Shapiro -Wilk’s test and Mauspher’s 

test respectively. Assumptions of normality for statistical tests were met unless otherwise stated. When the 

assumption of sp hericity was not met, a Greenhouse -Geisser’s correction was applied. Two -tailed paired 

Wilcoxon signed -rank tests were used for post hoc tests. Correction for multiple comparisons was applied 

where necessary via the false discovery rate (FDR) approach. The FDR -adjusted p-value was reported. 

# Data availability 

Data was converted to the CND data structure (Continuous -event Neural Data 68 - https://cnspworkshop.net ), 

allowing to analysing all datasets with the same preprocessing and analysis scripts. The list of MEEG data sets, 

with links to the data and relevant papers, is available at  https://cnspworkshop.net . Supplementary Table 1 

provides a complete list of datasets, each with the link to the original publication, authors list , link to the 

standardised CND version of the dataset, and link to the original dataset repository. Note that 17 datasets 

were available prior to this study, 11 datasets will be made available during the publication process of this 

manuscript, and the rest will be shared after an embargo period .

Analyses were conducted by using custom MATLAB scripts developed starting from publicly available scripts 

shared by the CNSP initiative (Cognition and Natural Sensory Processing;  https://cnspworkshop.net ). Such 

analysis scripts avail of external publicly available libraries: the mTRF -Toolbox 

(https://github.com/mickcrosse/mTRF -Toolbox )8, EEGLAB 69 ; and the NoiseTools library 

(http://audition.ens.fr/adc/NoiseTools )49 .

All scripts, including the new custom functions and data, can be downloaded from 

https://osf.io/c76p8/overview . Only the preprocessed data after downsampling was uploaded on the OSF 

dataset for minimising the size of the repository. The full datasets can be downloaded individually (see links 

in Supplementary Table 1 ) and preprocessed with the scripts provided. The scripts including future updates 

will be available on the CNSP resources GitHub repository ( https://github.com/CNSP -Workshop/CNSP -

resources/tree/main/CNSP ). 20 

# References 

1. Holdgraf, C.R., Rieger, J.W., Micheli, C., Martin, S., Knight, R.T., and Theunissen, F.E. (2017). Encoding 

and Decoding Models in Cognitive Electrophysiology. Front Syst Neurosci 11 , 61. 

10.3389/fnsys.2017.00061. 

2. Crosse, M.J., Zuk, N.J., Di Liberto, G.M., Nidiffer, A.R., Molholm, S., and Lalor, E.C. (2021). Linear 

Modeling of Neurophysiological Responses to Speech and Other Continuous Stimuli: Methodological 

Considerations for Applied Research. Frontiers in neuros cience 15 , 705621 -705621. 

10.3389/fnins.2021.705621. 

3. King, J. -R., and Gramfort, A. (2018). Encoding and decoding neuronal dynamics: Methodological 

framework to uncover the algorithms of cognition. 

4. Broderick, M.P., Anderson, A.J., Di Liberto, G.M., Crosse, M.J., and Lalor, E.C. (2018). 

Electrophysiological Correlates of Semantic Dissimilarity Reflect the Comprehension of Natural, 

Narrative Speech. Current Biology. 10.1016/j.cub.2018.01.080. 

5. Brodbeck, C., Hong, L.E., and Simon, J.Z. (2018). Rapid Transformation from Auditory to Linguistic 

Representations of Continuous Speech. Current Biology 28 , 3976 -3983.e3975. 

6. Leonard, M.K., Gwilliams, L., Sellers, K.K., Chung, J.E., Xu, D., Mischler, G., Mesgarani, N., 

Welkenhuysen, M., Dutta, B., and Chang, E.F. (2024). Large -scale single -neuron speech sound 

encoding across the depth of human cortex. Nature 626 , 593 -602. 10.1038/s41586 -023 -06839 -2. 

7. de Cheveigné, A., and Simon, J.Z. (2008). Denoising based on spatial filtering. Journal of Neuroscience 

Methods 171 , 331 -339. 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.03.015. 

8. Crosse, M.J., Di Liberto, G.M., Bednar, A., and Lalor, E.C. (2016). The multivariate temporal response 

function (mTRF) toolbox: A MATLAB toolbox for relating neural signals to continuous stimuli. 

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 10 . 10.3389/fnhum.2016.00604. 

9. Lalor, E.C., Power, A.J., Reilly, R.B., and Foxe, J.J. (2009). Resolving Precise Temporal Processing 

Properties of the Auditory System Using Continuous Stimuli. Journal of Neurophysiology 102 , 349 -

359. 10.1152/jn.90896.2008. 

10. Di Liberto, G.M., Barsotti, M., Vecchiato, G., Ambeck -Madsen, J., Del Vecchio, M., Avanzini, P., and 

Ascari, L. (2021). Robust anticipation of continuous steering actions from electroencephalographic 

data during simulated driving. Scientific Reports 11 , 23383. 10.1038/s41598 -021 -02750 -w. 

11. Nidiffer, A.R., Cao, C.Z., O'Sullivan, A., and Lalor, E.C. (2023). A representation of abstract linguistic 

categories in the visual system underlies successful lipreading. NeuroImage 282 , 120391. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2023.120391 .

12. Rogachev, A., and Sysoeva, O. (2024). Neural tracking of natural speech in children in relation to their 

receptive speech abilities. Cognitive Systems Research 86 , 101236. 

13. Kalashnikova, M., Peter, V., Di Liberto, G.M., Lalor, E.C., and Burnham, D. (2018). Infant -directed 

speech facilitates seven -month -old infants’ cortical tracking of speech. Scientific Reports 8.

10.1038/s41598 -018 -32150 -6. 

14. Di Liberto, G.M., Pelofi, C., Bianco, R., Patel, P., Mehta, A.D., Herrero, J.L., De Cheveigné, A., Shamma, 

S., and Mesgarani, N. (2020). Cortical encoding of melodic expectations in human temporal cortex. 

Elife 9, e51784. 

15. Lalor, E.C., Pearlmutter, B.A., Reilly, R.B., McDarby, G., and Foxe, J.J. (2006). The VESPA: a method for 

the rapid estimation of a visual evoked potential. NeuroImage 32 , 1549 -1561. 

16. Brodbeck, C., Presacco, A., and Simon, J.Z. (2018). Neural source dynamics of brain responses to 

continuous stimuli: Speech processing from acoustics to comprehension. NeuroImage 172 , 162 -174. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.01.042 .

17. Thornton, M., Mandic, D., and Reichenbach, T. (2022). Robust decoding of the speech envelope from 

EEG recordings through deep neural networks. Journal of neural engineering 19 , 046007. 

18. Broderick, M., Anderson, A., Di Liberto, G., Crosse, M., and Lalor, E. (2018). Data from: 

electrophysiological correlates of semantic dissimilarity reflect the comprehension of natural, 

narrative speech. Dryad Digital Repository. Published online February 23, 2018. 21 

19. Di Liberto, G.M., O'Sullivan, J.A., and Lalor, E.C. (2015). Low -frequency cortical entrainment to speech 

reflects phoneme -level processing. Current Biology 25 . 10.1016/j.cub.2015.08.030. 

20. O'Sullivan, J.A., Power, A.J., Mesgarani, N., Rajaram, S., Foxe, J.J., Shinn -Cunningham, B.G., Slaney, 

M., Shamma, S.A., and Lalor, E.C. (2014). Attentional Selection in a Cocktail Party Environment Can 

Be Decoded from Single -Trial EEG. Cerebral Cortex, b ht355 -bht355. 

21. Vanthornhout, J., Decruy, L., Wouters, J., Simon, J.Z., and Francart, T. (2018). Speech Intelligibility 

Predicted from Neural Entrainment of the Speech Envelope. Journal of the Association for Research 

in Otolaryngology 19 , 181 -191. 10.1007/s10162 -018 -0654 -z. 

22. Ding, N., Chatterjee, M., and Simon, J.Z. (2014). Robust cortical entrainment to the speech envelope 

relies on the spectro -temporal fine structure. NeuroImage 88 , 41 -46. 

23. de Cheveigné, A., Wong, D.E., Di Liberto, G.M., Hjortkjær, J., Slaney, M., and Lalor, E. (2018). Decoding 

the auditory brain with canonical component analysis. NeuroImage 172 , 206 -216. 

10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.01.033. 

24. Di Liberto, G.M., Wong, D., Melnik, G.A., and de Cheveigne, A. (2019). Low -frequency cortical 

responses to natural speech reflect probabilistic phonotactics. NeuroImage 196 , 237 -247. 

10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.04.037. 

25. Geirnaert, S., Vandecappelle, S., Alickovic, E., de Cheveigné, A., Lalor, E., Meyer, B.T., Miran, S., 

Francart, T., and Bertrand, A. (2021). Neuro -Steered Hearing Devices: Decoding Auditory Attention 

From the Brain. 

26. Hannah, J., and Di Liberto, G.M. (2026). Trust Modulates Speech Entrainment: Enhanced Cortical 

Tracking for Low Trust Speakers. bioRxiv, 2026.2003. 2011.711118. 

27. Ip, E.Y., Akkaya, A., Winchester, M.M., Bishop, S.J., Cowan, B.R., and Di Liberto, G.M. (2025). Exploring 

the impact of social relevance on the cortical tracking of speech: viability and temporal response 

characterisation. bioRxiv, 2025.2009. 2023.674728. 

28. Chalehchaleh, A., Winchester, M.M., and Di Liberto, G. (2024). Robust assessment of the cortical 

encoding of word -level expectations using the temporal response function. Journal of Neural 

Engineering, 2024 -2004.  https://doi.org/10.1088/1741 -2552/ada30a .

29. Jessen, S., Obleser, J., and Tune, S. (2021). Neural tracking in infants – An analytical tool for 

multisensory social processing in development. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience 52 , 101034. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2021.101034 .

30. Herbst, S.K., Fiedler, L., and Obleser, J. (2018). Tracking Temporal Hazard in the Human 

Electroencephalogram Using a Forward Encoding Model. eneuro 5, ENEURO.0017 -0018.2018. 

10.1523/ENEURO.0017 -18.2018. 

31. Di Liberto, G.M., Peter, V., Kalashnikova, M., Goswami, U., Burnham, D., and Lalor, E.C. (2018). 

Atypical cortical entrainment to speech in the right hemisphere underpins phonemic deficits in 

dyslexia. NeuroImage NIMG -17 -29 , 70 -79. 10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.2018.03.072. 

32. De Cheveigné, A., Wong, D.D.E., Di Liberto, G.M., Hjortkjær, J., Slaney, M., and Lalor, E. (2018). 

Decoding the auditory brain with canonical component analysis. NeuroImage 172 , 206 -216. 

33. Jessen, S., Fiedler, L., Münte, T.F., and Obleser, J. (2019). Quantifying the individual auditory and 

visual brain response in 7 -month -old infants watching a brief cartoon movie. NeuroImage 202 ,

116060 -116060. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116060. 

34. Di Liberto, G.M., Attaheri, A., Cantisani, G., Reilly, R.B., Ní Choisdealbha, Á., Rocha, S., Brusini, P., and 

Goswami, U. (2023). Emergence of the cortical encoding of phonetic features in the first year of life. 

Nature Communications 14 , 7789. 

35. Attaheri, A., Choisdealbha, Á.N., Di Liberto, G.M., Rocha, S., Brusini, P., Mead, N., Olawole -Scott, H., 

Boutris, P., Gibbon, S., and Williams, I. (2022). Delta -and theta -band cortical tracking and phase -

amplitude coupling to sung speech by infants. NeuroI mage 247 , 118698. 

36. Agmon, G., Jaeger, M., Tsarfaty, R., Bleichner, M.G., and Zion Golumbic, E. (2023). “Um…, it’s really 

difficult to… um… speak fluently”: Neural tracking of spontaneous speech. Neurobiology of Language 

4, 435 -454. 

37. Solanki, V.J. (2017). Brains in dialogue: investigating accommodation in live conversational speech 

for both speech and EEG data . (University of Glasgow). 22 

38. Van de Ryck, I., Heintz, N., Rotaru, I., Geirnaert, S., Bertrand, A., and Francart, T. (2026). EEG -based 

Decoding of Auditory Attention to Conversations with Turn -taking Speakers. Hearing Research, 

109539. 

39. Orf, M., Tune, S., Hannemann, R., and Obleser, J. (2025). Speech, gait, and brain dynamics during 

natural conversation in motion. bioRxiv, 2025.2012.2023.696153. 10.64898/2025.12.23.696153. 

40. King, J. -R., Charton, F., Lopez -Paz, D., and Oquab, M. (2020). Back -to -back regression: Disentangling 

the influence of correlated factors from multivariate observations. NeuroImage 220 , 117028. 

41. de Cheveigné, A., Di Liberto, G.M., Arzounian, D., Wong, D., Hjortkjaer, J., Fuglsang, S.A., and Parra, 

L.C. (2018). Multiway Canonical Correlation Analysis of Brain Signals. bioRxiv, 344960 -344960. 

10.1101/344960. 

42. Accou, B., Vanthornhout, J., hamme, H.V., and Francart, T. (2023). Decoding of the speech envelope 

from EEG using the VLAAI deep neural network. Scientific Reports 13 , 812. 10.1038/s41598 -022 -

27332 -2. 

43. Broderick, M., Di Liberto, G., Anderson, A., Rofes, A., and Lalor, E. (2020). Dissociable 

electrophysiological measures of natural language processing reveal differences in speech 

comprehension strategy in healthy ageing. bioRxiv, 2020.2004.2017.046201 -

04 2020.046204.046217.046201. 10.1101/2020.04.17.046201. 

44. Mischler, G., Li, Y.A., Bickel, S., Mehta, A.D., and Mesgarani, N. (2024). Contextual Feature Extraction 

Hierarchies Converge in Large Language Models and the Brain. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.17671. 

45. Broderick, M.P., Di Liberto, G.M., Anderson, A.J., Rofes, A., and Lalor, E.C. (2021). Dissociable 

electrophysiological measures of natural language processing reveal differences in speech 

comprehension strategy in healthy ageing. Scientific Reports 11 , 4963. 10.1038/s41598 -021 -84597 -

9. 

46. Di Liberto, G.M., Nie, J., Yeaton, J., Khalighinejad, B., Shamma, S.A., and Mesgarani, N. (2021). Neural 

representation of linguistic feature hierarchy reflects second -language proficiency. NeuroImage 227 ,

117586 -117586. 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117586. 

47. Di Liberto, G.M., Pelofi, C., Shamma, S., and de Cheveigné, A. (2020). Musical expertise enhances the 

cortical tracking of the acoustic envelope during naturalistic music listening. Acoustical Science and 

Technology 41 .

48. Cohen, S.S., and Parra, L.C. (2016). Memorable Audiovisual Narratives Synchronize Sensory and 

Supramodal Neural Responses. eneuro 3, ENEURO.0203 -0216.2016. 10.1523/eneuro.0203 -16.2016. 

49. de Cheveigné, A., Di Liberto, G.M., Arzounian, D., Wong, D.D.E., Hjortkjær, J., Fuglsang, S., and Parra, 

L.C. (2019). Multiway canonical correlation analysis of brain data. NeuroImage 186 , 728 -740. 

10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.2018.11.026. 

50. Obleser, J., and Kayser, C. (2019). Neural Entrainment and Attentional Selection in the Listening Brain. 

Trends in Cognitive Sciences. Elsevier Ltd. 

51. Klimovich -Gray, A., Di Liberto, G., Amoruso, L., Barrena, A., Agirre, E., and Molinaro, N. (2023). 

Increased top -down semantic processing in natural speech linked to better reading in dyslexia. 

NeuroImage 273 , 120072.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2023.120072 .

52. Attaheri, A., Ní Choisdealbha Á, Di Liberto, G.M., Rocha, S., Brusini, P., Mead, N., Olawole -Scott, H., 

Boutris, P., Gibbon, S., Williams, I., et al. (2022). Delta - and theta -band cortical tracking and phase -

amplitude coupling to sung speech by infants. Neuroimage 247 , 118698. 

10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118698. 

53. Verschueren, E., Somers, B., and Francart, T. (2019). Neural envelope tracking as a measure of speech 

understanding in cochlear implant users. Hearing Research 373 , 23 -31. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heares.2018.12.004 .

54. Somers, B., Verschueren, E., and Francart, T. (2018). Neural tracking of the speech envelope in 

cochlear implant users. Journal of Neural Engineering 16 , 16003 -16003. 10.1088/1741 -2552/aae6b9. 

55. Chen, Y. -P., Schmidt, F., Keitel, A., Rösch, S., Hauswald, A., and Weisz, N. (2023). Speech intelligibility 

changes the temporal evolution of neural speech tracking. NeuroImage 268 , 119894. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2023.119894 .23 

56. Van Hirtum, T., Somers, B., Dieudonné, B., Verschueren, E., Wouters, J., and Francart, T. (2023). 

Neural envelope tracking predicts speech intelligibility and hearing aid benefit in children with 

hearing loss. Hearing Research 439 , 108893.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heares.2023.108893 .

57. Van Hirtum, T., Somers, B., Verschueren, E., Dieudonné, B., and Francart, T. (2023). Delta -band neural 

envelope tracking predicts speech intelligibility in noise in preschoolers. Hearing Research 434 ,

108785.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heares.2023.108785 .

58. Carta, S., Aličković, E., Zaar, J., Valdés, A.L., and Di Liberto, G.M. (2025). Simultaneous cortical tracking 

of competing speech streams during attention switching. bioRxiv, 2025.2007. 2002.662762. 

59. Haufe, S., Meinecke, F., Görgen, K., Dähne, S., Haynes, J. -D., Blankertz, B., and Bießmann, F. (2014). 

On the interpretation of weight vectors of linear models in multivariate neuroimaging. NeuroImage 

87 , 96 -110.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.10.067 .

60. Di Liberto, G.M., Marion, G., and Shamma, S.A. (2021). The Music of Silence: Part II: Music Listening 

Induces Imagery Responses. The Journal of Neuroscience 41 , 7449. 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0184 -

21.2021. 

61. Marion, G., Di Liberto, G.M., and Shamma, S.A. (2021). The Music of Silence. Part I: Responses to 

Musical Imagery Accurately Encode Melodic Expectations and Acoustics. Journal of Neuroscience. 

62. Varma, S., and Simon, R. (2006). Bias in error estimation when using cross -validation for model 

selection. BMC Bioinformatics 7, 91. 10.1186/1471 -2105 -7-91. 

63. Wong, D.D.E., Fuglsang, S.A., Hjortkjaer, J., Ceolini, E., Slaney, M., and De Cheveigne, A. (2018). A 

Comparison of Regularization Methods in Forward and Backward Models for Auditory Attention 

Decoding. Frontiers in Neuroscience 12 , 531 -531. 10.3389/FNINS.2018.00531. 

64. Di Liberto, G.M., and Lalor, E.C. (2017). Indexing cortical entrainment to natural speech at the 

phonemic level: Methodological considerations for applied research. Hearing Research 348 , 70 -77. 

10.1016/j.heares.2017.02.015. 

65. Brookshire, G., Lu, J., Nusbaum, H.C., Goldin -Meadow, S., and Casasanto, D. (2017). Visual cortex 

entrains to sign language. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 

America 114 , 6352 -6357. 10.1073/pnas.1620350114. 

66. Ding, N., and Simon, J.Z. (2012). Neural coding of continuous speech in auditory cortex during 

monaural and dichotic listening. Journal of Neurophysiology 107 , 78 -89. 10.1152/jn.00297.2011. 

67. Wilroth, J., Silva, N.S., Tafakkor, A., de Avo Mesquita, B., Ip, E.Y.J., Lau, B., Hannah, J., and Di Liberto, 

G.M. (2026). Investigating neural speech processing with functional near infrared spectroscopy: 

considerations for temporal response functions. bioRxiv, 2026.2003.2020.713212. 

10.64898/2026.03.20.713212. 

68. Di Liberto, G.M., Nidiffer, A., Crosse, M.J., Zuk, N., Haro, S., Cantisani, G., Winchester, M.M., Igoe, A., 

McCrann, R., and Chandra, S. (2024). A standardised open science framework for sharing and re -

analysing neural data acquired to continuous stimuli. Neurons, Behavior, Data analysis, and Theory, 

1-25. 

69. Delorme, A., and Makeig, S. (2004). EEGLAB: an open source toolbox for analysis of single -trial EEG 

dynamics including independent component analysis. J Neurosci Methods 134 , 9-21. 

10.1016/j.jneumeth.2003.10.009. 

70. Brennan, J.R. (2018). EEG Datasets for Naturalistic Listening to "Alice in Wonderland" (Version 1). 

71. Gwilliams, L., Flick, G., Marantz, A., Pylkkänen, L., Poeppel, D., and King, J. -R. (2023). Introducing 

MEG -MASC a high -quality magneto -encephalography dataset for evaluating natural speech 

processing. Scientific Data 10 , 862. 10.1038/s41597 -023 -02752 -5. 

72. Piazza, G., Carta, S., Ip, E., Pérez -Navarro, J., Kalashnikova, M., Martin, C.D., and Di Liberto, G.M. 

(2024). Are you talking to me? How the choice of speech register impacts listeners' hierarchical 

encoding of speech. bioRxiv, 2024 -2009. 

73. Piazza, G., Carta, S., Ip, E.Y.J., Pérez -Navarro, J., Kalashnikova, M., Martin, C.D., and Di Liberto, G.M. 

(2025). Are you talking to me? How the choice of speech register impacts listeners’ hierarchical 

encoding of speech. 

74. Bollens, L., Accou, B., Van hamme, H., and Francart, T. (2023). SparrKULee: A Speech -evoked Auditory 

Response Repository of the KU Leuven, containing EEG of 85 participants. V3 ed. KU Leuven RDR. 24 

75. De Palma, I.C., Lopez, L.S., and Lopez -Valdes, A. (2023). Effects of spectral and temporal modulation 

degradation on intelligibility and cortical tracking of speech signals. pp. 5192 -5196. 

76. Di Liberto, G.M., Goswami, U., Attaheri, A., Choisdealbha Á, N., Rocha, S., Mead, N., Olawole -Scott, 

H., and Grey, C. (2023). Data and code from “Emergence of the cortical encoding of phonetic features 

in the first year of life". OSF  https://osf.io/mdnwg .

77. Das, N., Francart, T., and Bertrand, A. (2019). Auditory Attention Detection Dataset KULeuven 

(Version 2.0). Zenodo. 

78. Cantisani, G., Shamma, S., and Di Liberto, G.M. (2024). Neural signatures of musical and linguistic 

interactions during natural song listening. 

79. Di Liberto, G.M., Pelofi, C., Bianco, R., Patel, P., Mehta, A.D., Herrero, J.L., De Cheveigné, A., Shamma, 

S.A., and Mesgarani, N. (2021). Cortical encoding of melodic expectations in human temporal cortex. 

80. Di Liberto, G.M., Marion, G., and Shamma, S.A. (2021). Data from The music of silence: Part ii: Music 

listening induces imagery responses. . Dryad. Dryad. 25 

Fig. 1 | Evaluation method overview and performance on univariate encoding models. a, Canonical Prediction 

Alignment (CPA) workflow. Data are partitioned into three folds. The encoding model is trained on Fold 1 and used to 

generate MEEG predictions on the other f olds. Fold 2 is used to fit a CCA mapping between predict ed and measured 

MEEG signals, which is then applied to Fold 3 to compute the correlation of the first canonical component (R -CPA) . This 

procedure is repeated under cross -validation. b, Illustration of conventional evaluation R -MAX, CPA, participant -average 

evaluation (PA), and CPA -PA on the SyntheticEEG -1 dataset at an SNR of -30dB. Conventional metrics yield low 

correlations due to EEG noise, even at the best channel (R -MAX = 0.1). CPA projects predictions and acquired neural 

signal to a shared canonical s pace, attenuating the task -irrelevant noise in the neural signal, approximating the 

underlying ground -truth signal . When neural signals can be temporally aligned across participants, participant averaging 

further refines the ground -truth approximation, yielding R -CPA -PA. c, Evaluation of univariate envelope encoding 

models on synthetic EEG across SNRs (N=30 participants per SNR ). Conventional metrics (R -AVG, R -MAX) are compared 

with R -CPA and R -CPA -PA; Mean ± SE are shown. d, Signal detectability quantified as classification accuracy (%) in 

identifying whether a 5 -s EEG prediction segment corresponds to the correct synthetic EEG segment or a random one. 

e, Overview of datasets and tasks. Thirty -four datasets were analysed (31 EEG, 2 MEG, 1 fNIRS), comprising 818 

participant -level datapoints. f,g, MEEG prediction correlations and signal detectability for univariate envelope encoding 

models fitted to low -frequency (1 -8 Hz) signals across 34 real MEEG datasets. Each dot represents the participant 

average for a g iven dataset. 26 

Fig. 2 | Robust retrieval of neural variables of interests with multivariate encoding models . a, Synthetic EEG generation 

pipeline . Speech features from LalorNatSpeech (x₁ : envelope; x₂ : word onsets) were convolved with synthetic impulse 

responses to generate simulated neural signals (y₁ , y₂ ), which were combined with real EEG noise (yₙ ) to form the final 

signal (y). Data were generated for six groups (N=50 each) at mean SNRs of 0 to -50dB, with ±2.5dB variability (α) and 

variable x₂ encoding strength (β). b, Multivariate encoding model s fitted on synthetic data using speech envelope and 

word -onset features. Group -averaged TRFs at Fz (envelope) and Pz (word onset) recover the ground -truth impulse 

responses across all SNRs. Estimates degrade when fewer participants are averaged (N=10). c, Trough magnitude at 450 

ms (TRF -N400) correlates significantly with β at all SNRs, with reduced correlation values at lower SNRs, indicating 

successful recovery of x 2 encoding strength across noise levels. d. Sensitivity of evaluation metrics to β and SNR . R -CPA 

(first two canonical components, CCs ) is compared with an EEG prediction metric isolating x2 (R -MAX partial -x2 ). The ideal 

metric correlates strongly with β but minimally with SNR. e, Retrieval of neural variables from real EEG during natural 

(LalorNatSpeech ) and time -reversed ( LalorRevSpeech ) speech listening . A coustic and lexical (word onset) features were 

modelled, with R-MAX partial isolating the contributions of acoustic (envelope , x1) and lexical (word onset , x2) features. 

R-CPA is reported for the first two CCs. Robust acoustic signatures is observed in both datasets, whereas lexical encoding 

is present only for natural speech. f, R-CPA and R -CPA -PA scores across CCs . In synthetic data with two neural sources 

at -30dB , stimulus -relevant information is captured primarily by the first two CCs. In real MEEG data , 3-5 CCs contain 

stimulus -relevant information, consistent with stimulus -MEEG CCA using stimulus -only lags (CCA -1). Applying lags to 

both stimulus and neural signals (CCA -2) yields a broader dispersion of information across CCs. 27 

Name  Participants  Task  Technology  Country 

Age  N Stimulus type 

Moda -

lity  Type  Device 

Chan -

nels 

LalorNatSpeech 4,18,19  Adults  19  Speech  A Listening  EEG BioSemi Active -Two  128  Ireland 

LalorRevSpeech 4,18,19  Adults  10  Speech  A Listening  EEG BioSemi Active -Two  128  Ireland 

AliceSpeech 70  Adults  20  Speech  A Listening  EEG actiCap, Brain Products GmbH  60  USA 

GwilliamsSpeechMEG -171  Adults  11  Speech  A Listening  MEG 208 axial -gradiometer  208  USA 

GwilliamsSpeechMEG -271  Adults  10  Speech  A Listening  MEG 208 axial -gradiometer  208  USA 

PodcastListening 27 ,* Adults  20  Speech  A Listening  EEG BioSemi Active -Two  64  Ireland 

PodcastListening fNIRS 67 ,* Adults  8 Speech  A Listening co -presence  fNIRS Artinis  16  Netherlands 

TrustSpeech 26 ,* Adults  20  Speech  A Listening  EEG BioSemi Active -Three  64  Ireland 

EmotionSpeech 27 ,* Adults  27  Speech  A Listening  EEG BioSemi Active -Two  64  Ireland 

FDSpeech L1 72,73  Adults  19  Speech  A Listening  EEG BioSemi Active -Two  64  Ireland 

FDSpeech L2 72,73  Adults  21  Speech  A Listening  EEG Brain Products GmbH  64  Basque 

SparrKULee1 74  Adults  77  Speech  A Listening  EEG BioSemi Active -Two  64  Belgium 

SparrKULee2 74  Adults  56  Speech  A Listening  EEG BioSemi Active -Two  64  Belgium 

VocodedSpeech 75 ,* Adults  13  Vocoded Speech  A Listening  EEG BioSemi Active -Two  64  Ireland 

ChildStories_Sysoeva 12  3-8yo children  52  Speech  A Listening  EEG Brain Products actiCHamp  32  Russia 

BabyRhythmCambridge Adults 34,76  Adults  17  Sung speech  AV  Listening  EEG GES 300 amplifier, Geodesic  64  UK 

BabyRhythmCambridge 4mo 34,76  4mo infants  47  Sung speech  AV  Listening  EEG GES 300 amplifier, Geodesic  64  UK 

BabyRhythmCambridge 7mo 34,76  7mo infants  47  Sung speech  AV  Listening  EEG GES 300 amplifier, Geodesic  64  UK 

BabyRhythmCambridge 11mo 34,76  11mo infants  47  Sung speech  AV  Listening  EEG GES 300 amplifier, Geodesic  64  UK 

ConversationListening * Adults  10  Speech  A Listening  EEG mBrainTrain Smarting  24  Ireland 

ConversationSpeaking * Adults  20  No stimulus  A Speaking  EEG mBrainTrain Smarting  24  Ireland 

CocktailAttSwitch 58 ,* Adults  24  Speech  A Listening selective attention  EEG BioSemi Active -Two  64  Ireland 

AAD KULeuven 77  Adults  16  Speech  A Listening selective attention  EEG BioSemi Active -Two  64  Belgium 

CantisaniSpeech 78  Adults  20  Speech  A Listening  EEG BioSemi Active -Two  64  France 

CantisaniMelody 78  Adults  20  Music  A Listening  EEG BioSemi Active -Two  64  France 

CantisaniSong 78  Adults  20  Sung speech  A Listening  EEG BioSemi Active -Two  64  France 

diliBach 14,79  Adults  20  Music  A Listening  EEG BioSemi Active -Two  64  France 

MelodySwitch * Adults  17  Music  A Listening  EEG BioSemi Active -Two  64  Ireland 

PolyphonicBach * Adults  30  Music  A Listening  EEG mBrainTrain Smarting  24  Ireland 

MusicImagery Listening 60,61,80  Adults  21  Music  A Listening  EEG BioSemi Active -Two  64  France 

MusicImagery Imagination 60,61,80  Adults  21  Metronome  - Auditory imagery  EEG BioSemi Active -Two  64  France 

StandupComedy * Adults  14  Speech/Video  AV  Listening  EEG BioSemi Active -Two  64  Ireland 

SignLanguageSigners  Adults  14  Sign Language  V Watching  EEG BioSemi Active -Two  64  France 

SignLanguageNonsigners  Adults  20  Sign Language  V Watching  EEG BioSemi Active -Two  64  France 

Table 1 | List of datasets including the essential information on each real dataset analysed in this study. Please see 

Supplementary Table 1 for additional details, including links to the datasets , relevant papers , stimulus material, 

secondary tasks . The star symbol next to the dataset title indicates new datasets that were not publicly available 

previously (note that some of them may have an embargo period). The shading in the table groups datasets (e.g., same 

experiment with different cohorts or rec ording device). 28 

# a

# b

Supplementary Fig. 1 | Evaluation of univariate encoding models fit to real datasets . This figure extends Fig. 1f,g ,

presenting the result distributions for each dataset. Low -frequency MEEG (1 -8 Hz) and fNIRS ( 0.01 -0.7 Hz) prediction 

correlations (left) and signal detectability (right) are compared for the three evaluation metrics. Boxplots represent the 

25 th and 75 th percentiles of the result distribution across participants, with the circle capturing the median value and 

the whiskers indicating the extrem e non -outlier values. Outliers are shows are separate dots when identified. a,

Comparing R -CPA with R -MAX and R -AVG. b, A similar comparison is shown when participant averaging (PA) evaluation 

is applied (R -CPA -PA, R -MAX -PA, R -AVG -PA). This analysis is possible for datasets where the neural data across 

participants have a precise temporal correspondence (e.g., participants are presented with the same identical stimuli ).29 

Supplementary Fig. 2 | Univariate encoding model performance across neural rates. Correlation and signal 

detectability distributions are shown for each real dataset, extending Fig. 1f,g. a, Delta -band (0.5 –4 Hz) MEEG. b,

Theta -band (4 –8 Hz). Each dot denotes the participant average per dataset. 

Supplementary Fig. 3 | Multivariate encoding model evaluation on synthetic data. Equivalent to Fig. 1c, shown for 

SyntheticEEG -2. Each SNR condition includes N= 50 synthetic participants with individual SNRs uniformly distributed 

within ±2.5 dB of the mean.