Title: Grammar of the Wave: Towards Explainable Multivariate Time Series Event Detection via Neuro-Symbolic VLM Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.11479v1

Published Time: Fri, 13 Mar 2026 00:24:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# Grammar of the Wave: Towards Explainable Multivariate Time Series Event Detection via Neuro-Symbolic VLM Agents 

Sky Chenwei Wan 1,2 , Tianjun Hou 2 , Yifei Wang 1 , Xiqing Chang 2 and Aymeric Jan 21T´ el´ ecom Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, France 

> 2

AI Lab, SLB chenwei.wan@telecom-paris.fr, thou2@slb.com 

Abstract 

Time Series Event Detection (TSED) has long been an important task with critical applications across many high-stakes domains. Unlike statis-tical anomalies, events are defined by semantics with complex internal structures, which are diffi-cult to learn inductively from scarce labeled data in real-world settings. In light of this, we introduce Knowledge-Guided TSED, a new setting where a model is given a natural-language event description and must ground it to intervals in multivariate sig-nals with little or no training data. To tackle this challenge, we introduce Event Logic Tree (ELT), a novel knowledge representation framework to bridge linguistic descriptions and physical time se-ries data via modeling the intrinsic temporal-logic structures of events. Based on ELT, we present a neuro-symbolic VLM agent framework that itera-tively instantiates primitives from signal visualiza-tions and composes them under ELT constraints, producing both detected intervals and faithful ex-planations in the form of instantiated trees. To val-idate the effectiveness of our approach, we release a benchmark based on real-world time series data with expert knowledge and annotations. Experi-ments and human evaluation demonstrate the supe-riority of our method compared to supervised fine-tuning baselines and existing zero-shot time series reasoning frameworks based on LLMs/VLMs. We also show that ELT is critical in mitigating VLMs’ inherent hallucination in matching signal morphol-ogy with event semantics. 

1 Introduction 

Time Series Event Detection (TSED) aims to locate segments in time series data where specific events happen. It has long been an important task across many high-stakes domains, in-cluding health [Supratak et al. , 2017; Perslev et al. , 2019], and energy production [Khaouja et al. , 2025]. Compared to other tasks in time series analysis, TSED is especially chal-lenging. Unlike classification, which aims to assign single labels to time series sequences [Mohammadi Foumani et al. ,2024], TSED requires fine-grained discrimination to be made on small timeframes or timestamps. Compared to anomaly detection, which identifies statistical drifts [Zamanzadeh Dar-ban et al. , 2024], events usually carry specific semantic mean-ings (e.g., “a sharp rise in A followed by a plateau in B”) with internal temporal-logic structures across multiple physi-cal channels. The prevalent paradigm for TSED task is inductive pat-tern recognition. Models are trained to learn patterns from a large number of labeled examples. However, in certain do-mains, acquiring annotated data is time and resource consum-ing, making the effective training of such models difficult. Explainability is another shortcoming of inductive learn-ing. Although gradients [Sundararajan et al. , 2017] or inter-mediate activations [Selvaraju et al. , 2017] of neural mod-els can provide transparency, humans do not trust the results without logically organized clues. Such AI systems are diffi-cult to be adopted in the domains where trust between AI and human experts is indispensable. In this study, we mitigate the issues by looking at TSED from a cognitive point of view: describing the patterns of events on time series with natural language is generally easier than collecting a large amount of data and annotations. This is in line with the cognitive process when human experts in-terpret time series data: read unstructured linguistic descrip-tions, comprehend the internal compositional structure, and deduce the occurrence of events from the time series measure-ments. Therefore, it naturally provides better explainability. We formalize the problem as Knowledge-Guided Time Series Event Detection (K-TSED) . As no training data and annotations are needed, we switch the task setting from in-ductive pattern recognition to deductive knowledge ground-ing. However, how to accurately and logically ground the knowledge to time series is still a problem. The example be-low demonstrates an event description in the energy domain: During the Buildup event, the Volume should re-main stable across the entire phase. Simultane-ously, the Pressure should either recover slightly with the rate of change decreasing or bounce up quickly, and then reach a steady phase. When humans describe such events, atomic morphologi-cal patterns (e.g. “ Volume remains stable”, “ pressure recov-ers slightly”) are defined, along with temporal-logic relations (e.g. “simultaneously”, “and then”) hierarchically forming 

> arXiv:2603.11479v1 [cs.LG] 12 Mar 2026

the global pattern of the event type “buildup”. Therefore, an explainable solution should not only map the global event to the time series interval correctly, but also map sub-patterns to their instances accurately, as evidence supporting the global decision that could easily be verified by humans. To achieve the joint goal of accuracy and explainability, we introduce Event Logic Tree (ELT), a novel knowledge representation framework that translates unstructured event descriptions to tree structures. The tree structures faithfully model the temporal-logic relationships between atomic pat-terns, clearly demonstrating the hierarchy that constitutes the global event. Based on ELT, we create SELA, a neuro-symbolic VLM agent system for zero-shot K-TSED, com-prising two types of agents: Logic Analyst agents construct ELT schema from the unstructured event description, and Sig-nal Inspector agents incrementally locate and refine time series intervals guided by the ELT schema. In SELA, ELT plays the critical role in the system as the structured inter-mediate representation of the target event. It not only guides the agents’ reasoning and behavior, but also provides well-organized clues that can easily be verified by human experts. To validate the effectiveness of our approach, we create the first K-TSED benchmark based on real-world time series data collected from the energy domain. The event descriptions and ground truth labels are created and verified by human ex-perts. We demonstrate that our method significantly outper-forms the previous inductive pattern recognition methods in low resource settings, and the existing deductive knowledge grounding solutions without ELT, approaching human-level performance. Through an ablation study, we also demon-strate the critical role of ELT in mitigating VLM’s inherent hallucination problem. Our contributions can be summarized as follows: (1) A new problem setting K-TSED. (2) Our solution: A knowledge representation framework with an implementation based on neural-symbolic VLM agents. (3) A new benchmark built from real-world time series data, with experiments showing the superiority of our method. 

2 Problem Formulation 

The objective of the task K-TSED is to localize all event in-stances in a multivariate signal that semantically align with the linguistic event descriptions. 

Input. A multivariate time series X ∈ RT ×C (T time steps, 

C channels), and a textual description L that characterizes signal features for each event type e ∈ E , where E denotes the set of all event types. 

Ground Truth. Let ˆY = {ˆym}Mm=1 denote the set of ground-truth event instances. Each instance is a tuple 

(ˆ t(m) 

> on

, ˆt(m) 

> off

, ˆe(m)), where [ˆ t(m) 

> on

, ˆt(m) 

> off

] represents its temporal interval and ˆe(m) the event type. 

Output. A detection function fθ : ( X, L) → Y that pre-dicts a set of candidate event instances: 

Y = {yk}Kk=1 = {(t(k) 

> on

, t (k)

> off

, e (k))}Kk=1 (1) 

Objective. Minimizing the discrepancy between the pre-dicted set Y and the ground truth ˆY, which requires: (1) De-tection Accuracy: For any ground-truth ˆyj ∈ ˆY, a matched prediction yi ∈ Y (e(i) = ˆ e(j)) should reach a certain align-ment threshold (e.g. temporal IoU) with ˆyj . (2) Localization Precision: For each matched event instance pair (yi, ˆyj ) un-der the objective (1), the deviation between the predicted tem-poral boundaries [t(i) 

> on

, t (i)

> off

] and the ground truth [ˆ t(j) 

> on

, ˆt(j)

> off

]

should be minimized. 

3 Related Work 

3.1 Time Series Symbolic Representation 

To achieve the goal of accurate event detection with explain-ability, the internal structures of events need to be explicitly modeled. Based on the example introduced in Section 1, we set the following desiderata for designing the logic structure: 

D1. Hierarchical Representation: the ability to capture hierarchical structures of events: the way atomic patterns re-cursively form sub-patterns, and finally the global pattern. 

D2. Semantic Quantification: the ability to quantify the coherence between the signal morphology and the semantics. 

D3. Topological Elasticity: the ability to define events based on the internal temporal-logic structure, agnostic to actual temporal durations: the representation must support “time warping” (elastic stretching or compressing of time) while maintaining logical validity. We analyze existing symbolic time series representation frameworks based on our desiderata (summarized in Table 1). (1) SAX [Lin et al. , 2003; Malinowski et al. , 2013] and ABBA [Elsworth and G¨ uttel, 2020] map time series into string sequences using unsupervised learning. Each character represents a specific shape or amplitude. However, the unsu-pervised learning is performed on the dataset level, making the symbolic representation dataset-dependent. Moreover, the repeated sub-strings carry semantics but do not quantify coherence (partially satisfying D2), and do not allow hierar-chical structure (failing D1) or complex topological relation-ships (failing D3). (2) Logical-Shapelets [Mueen et al. , 2011] represents en-tire time series with a series of frequently appearing sub-sequences with fixed length, i.e., shapelets (failing D3). Z-Time [Lee et al. , 2024] improves the representation by mak-ing the length variable (satisfying D3). Both the shapelets and discrete representations of Z-Time carry no semantic abstrac-tion (failing D2). Regarding structural modeling, Logical-Shapelets only considers boolean relations, and while Z-Time uses Allen’s algebra [Allen, 1983], only limited hierarchy structures can be represented by stacking temporal relation pairs. Therefore, both approaches partially satisfy D1. (3) Chronicle System [Dousson and Le Maigat, 2007] ap-plies graph structure to represent temporal events, where each sub-event is considered as a node in the graph, and STL [Maler and Nickovic, 2004] represents events as recursive logical formulas over signals intervals, both satisfying D1. However, both systems model semantic coherence as binary D1: Hierarchical Representation D2: Semantic Quantification D3: Topological Elasticity                  

> SAX / ABBA ✗▲✗
> Logical-Shapelets ▲✗✗
> Z-Time ▲✗✓
> Chronicle / STL ✓▲✗
> Event Logic Tree (Ours) ✓✓✓
> Table 1: Comparison of frameworks against our desiderata. ( ✓: Sat-isfied; ▲: Limited / Partially satisfied; ✗: Not satisfied)

values (true/false) (partially satisfying D2), and their reliance on actual interval durations does not meet D3. In summary, existing symbolic systems can only make structured representations from time series but not language, thus not satisfying the requirements of K-TSED. In contrast, our proposed ELT framework employs tree structures based on Allen’s algebra and boolean operators to support D1. The definition of tree schema and instantiation on actual time se-ries data are separated to satisfy D3. ELT supports quantify-ing semantic coherence with neural models over any combi-nation of basic time series signal attributes, satisfying D2. 

3.2 Multimodal LLMs for Time Series Reasoning 

Though foundation models pre-trained on large-scale time se-ries data have shown promising performance in low-resource settings, fine-tuning is still necessary, and cross-modal rea-soning is restricted [Ansari et al. , 2024; Liu et al. , 2024; Goswami et al. , 2024]. Recently, LLMs’ potential to serve as few/zero-shot time series reasoners have been widely ex-plored. ChatTS [Xie et al. , 2025] designed an encoder with synthetic data to align time series with language for QA tasks. However, the domain gap between synthetic and real-world data is difficult to bridge, and embedding time se-ries can still introduce the risk of hallucination. VL-Time [Liu et al. , 2025] visualizes time series data as figures to di-rectly adopt vision-language reasoning capabilities without extra TS-language alignment. While it has shown advantages in classification, visualization inevitably loses precision, and hallucination is still a risk. Our approach employs active vi-sualization tools to overcome precision loss and effectively mitigates hallucination with ELT representations. 

4 Event Logic Tree 

4.1 ELT Schema 

The Event Logic Tree schema is parsed from textual descrip-tions only, independent of actual time series data. One event corresponds to one tree. 

Definition 1 (Node Schema) . The Event Logic Tree Schema is denoted as S. Any node in the schema n ∈ S belongs to two categories: primitives and composites. 

1. Primitive (Leaf Node) : The atomic signal patterns over single physical channels, denoted as np = ⟨τ, c ⟩, where: 

• τ : The semantic predicate that describes signal mor-phology, which can be a compound of basic time se-ries attributes, e.g., “a steep linear increase with high-frequency noise”. 

• c: The physical channel index where this atomic pattern would occur. 

2. Composite (Internal Node). The temporal-logic rela-tions that form the global event hierarchically with the prim-itives, denoted as nϕ = ⟨N , op ⟩, where: 

• N = [ n1, . . . , n k]: An ordered list of child nodes, either primitives or lower-level composites. 

• op ∈ { SEQ , SYNC , GUARD , OR }: The temporal-logic operator defining the relationship between child nodes. 

4.2 Constitutive Axioms 

Based on the definitions above, we establish three axioms to serve as preconditions for valid schema construction, and properly control the search space during instantiation. 

Axiom 1 (Constructive Composition) . A composite node must add structural meaning. Formally, for any composite 

nϕ, |N | ≥ 2.

Remark. Axiom 1 excludes bad structures with self-nesting, and any logical NOT as composite with a single child. We require all primitives to be defined positively .

Axiom 2 (Temporal Compactness) . The semantics of any node must cover its full temporal span. Any undefined gap inside the temporal spans of composites must be bounded by a hyperparameter. 

Remark. Primitives are considered to be compact by defi-nition. For any composite, assuming the compactness toler-ance is 1, a composite whose children are assigned disjoint intervals like [1 , 2] and [4 , 6] will be prohibited by Axiom 2. 

Axiom 3 (Physical Exclusivity) . A physical channel c can only support one active primitive state at any time point t.

4.3 Instantiation of ELT 

Definition 2 (Node Instance) . An instance implies designat-ing a specific time interval to a schema node n.

1. Primitive Instance. A primitive instance ˆnp is defined as: ⟨np, I, μ ⟩, where: 

• I = [ ton , t off ]: The detected time interval .

• μ = Mτ (X, I, c ) ∈ [0 , 1] : The semantic coherence score , which quantifies the alignment between the signal and the predicate. The implementation of the semantic function Mτ is not restricted to rule-based functions. Measurement can be evaluated based on the distance be-tween the embeddings of linguistic description and sig-nal pattern in an aligned latent space. 

2. Composite Instance. A composite instance ˆnϕ is defined as ⟨nϕ, Iϕ, μ ϕ⟩:

• Iϕ = [min ˆn∈ ˆN t(ˆ n) 

> on

, max ˆn∈ ˆN t(ˆ n)

> off

]: The composite in-terval , which is the temporal span of constituents’ inter-vals (subject to Axiom 2). ˆN = [ˆ n1, . . . , ˆnk] denotes the child instances. 

• μϕ = op (ˆ n1, . . . , ˆnk): The recursive confidence score 

by applying the operator on the constituents. Operator Natural Language Description Formalization TS Instance 

SEQ “A spike in A is followed by a drop in B.” “A drop in B occurs after a spike in A.” SEQ (Spike A, Drop B )B

> A

SYNC “A square wave in A is synchronized with a spike in B.” “A square wave in A and a spike in B occur simultaneously .” SYNC (SquareWave A, Spike B )B

> A

GUARD “A drop in A is found within a rise in B.” “A rise in B encompasses a drop in A.” GUARD (Drop A, Rise B )B

> A

OR “Either a spike in A or a drop in B.” “At least one of a spike in A or a drop in B occurs.” OR (Spike A, Drop B )B

> A

Table 2: Core operators of Event Logic Tree. 

To ensure the coherence of Axiom 3, we need to introduce a collision operator Ψ. If the Axiom 3 is violated by any instance, Ψ = 1 .

Definition 3 (Channel-Semantic Collision) .

Ψ(ˆ nA, ˆnB ) = max  

> p∈Π(ˆ nA)
> q∈Π(ˆ nB)

1

h cp = cq

 ∧  ℓ(Ip ∩ I q ) > ϵ i

(2) 

Π(ˆ n) denotes the set of primitive instances descendants of 

ˆn, if ˆn is a composite instance, or the set of ˆn itself, if ˆn is a primitive instance. 1[·] denotes the indication function. For discrete sampling, a change point may belongs to both adja-cent intervals at the same time. This violation case should be ignored. Therefore, Semantic Nullity Threshold ϵ is intro-duced to set up a tolerance. 

Definition 4 (Temporal-Logic Operators) . We define the core operator set to comprise four operators: Ocore =

{SEQ , SYNC , GUARD , OR } (Table 2). The operators aggre-gate confidence scores in a bottom-up manner with product T-norm, while respecting Temporal Compactness and Physi-cal Exclusivity. 

1. SEQ (Sequence). SEQ represents the temporal prece-dence relationship (B follows A). The confidence score is computed with product T-norm while controlled by validity gates: 

SEQ (ˆ nA, ˆnB ) =( μA · μB ) · (1 − Ψ(ˆ nA, ˆnB )) 

·G causal (ˆ nA, ˆnB ) · G coh (ˆ nA, ˆnB ) (3) 

where the term (1 − Ψ(ˆ nA, ˆnB )) enforces Physical Exclu-sivity. The causality gate Gcausal (ˆ nA, ˆnB ) = 1[tB 

> on

> t A

> on

] ·

1[tB 

> off

> t A

> off

] enforces the temporal precedence relation-ship. The coherence gate Gcoh (ˆ nA, ˆnB ) = 1[( tB 

> on

− tA 

> off

−

δ) < 0] prohibits any significant semantic gap beyond the bound δ to ensure the Temporal Compactness principle. 

2. SYNC (Synchronization). SYNC represents temporal identity ( IA = IB ). A penalty term based on IoU, denoted as IoU( IA, IB ) = ℓ(IA∩I B )  

> ℓ(IA∪I B)

, is applied to penalize the joint confidence in case of temporal misalignment. 

SYNC (ˆ nA, ˆnB ) = ( μA · μB ) · (1 − Ψ(ˆ nA, ˆnB )) 

· exp 



− 1 − IoU (IA, IB )

κ



(4) 

where κ is the alignment tolerance. 

3. GUARD (Containment). GUARD represents IA ⊂ I B .Boundaries of A that spill outside B are penalized: 

GUARD (ˆ nA, ˆnB ) = ( μA · μB ) · (1 − Ψ(ˆ nA, ˆnB )) 

· exp 



− ∆on + ∆ off 

σ



(5) 

where ∆on = max(0 , t B 

> on

− tA

> on

) and ∆off = max(0 , t A 

> off

−

tB

> off

) quantify how much A extends beyond B, controlled by temperature σ.

4. OR (Disjunction). OR models semantic alternatives for the same instance. We encourage the two alternatives to refer to the same interval by using the same IoU-based alignment penalty as SYNC :

OR (ˆ nA, ˆnB ) = ( μA + μB − μA · μB )

· exp 



− 1 − IoU (IA, IB )

κ



(6) 

4.4 Operational Completeness 

From a logical perspective, SEQ , SYNC , and GUARD are con-junctive , representing the Boolean AND (co-existing relation [Lee et al. , 2024]) projected onto temporal relationships. We can thus unify them as a generalized Temporal Conjunction 

AND K:

AND K(ˆ nA, ˆnB ) = ( μA · μB ) · K (ˆ nA, ˆnB )

·  1 − Ψ(ˆ nA, ˆnB ) (7) where K maps to SEQ /SYNC /GUARD by working as corre-sponding soft/hard validity gates. 

Proposition 1 (Operational Completeness) . The operator set 

Ocore forms a complete basis for the 13 fundamental Allen’s interval relations. This holds true whenever Axioms 1-3 are satisfied. Logic Analyst            

> Signal Inspector
> Neuro -Symbolic
> Agents
> Joint Visual -Symbolic Visualizer
> Unified Tool -Use Interface
> Active Visualization Tools
> Zoom
> In/Out
> Central Logic Engine
> Data Layer
> (Multivariate Time Series)
> Definition Layer
> (Event Logic Tree Schema)
> Instance Layer
> (Interval & Confidence)
> Bottom -up Fuzzy Logic Computation
> Render Figure
> Schema Artifact
> Pattern
> Description
> Input SELA
> Instance Artifact
> Data Query
> Draw
> Markers Time Series
> Data
> SYNC
> SEQ OR
> SEQ {
> "name" :"view_window ",
> "arguments" : {
> "interval" : [ 480 ,620 ],
> "vlines ": [ 520 ,560 ]}
> }
> {
> "name" :"instantiate" ,
> "arguments" : {
> "instances" : [
> {…} ,{…} ]
> }
> }InstanceArtifact
> Observation
> Function Call
> {
> "name" :"submit_schema ",
> "arguments" : {
> "schema" :{…}
> }SchemaArtifact
> </>
> </>
> </>
> Update Tree
> Update Tree
> Thought
> Thought

Figure 1: Overview of the SELA system. 

Proof Sketch. We demonstrate that the generalized con-junction AND K (as SEQ, SYNC, GUARD ) exhaustively cover the Allen’s algebra partition: (1) The Precedence Group ( SEQ ): The relations implying temporal precedence are handled by the SEQ . The causality gate ( tB 

> on

> t A 

> on

∧

tB 

> off

> t A

> off

) distinguishes it from SYNC and GUARD . (i) 

Meets and Before : While Meets naturally corresponds to 

SEQ , the disjoint Before relation is bounded by horizon δ to prevent any semantic gap that would violate Axiom 2. There-fore, the Before relation is treated as a relaxed variant of 

Meets . (ii) Overlaps : a special case corresponding to SEQ if and only if Physical Exclusivity is ensured across all channels over the overlapping interval ( Ψ = 0 ). (2) The Containment Group ( GUARD ): The During , Starts , and Finishes relations can be defined by nesting IA ⊂ I B , which corresponds to the GUARD operator. (3) The Identity Group ( SYNC ): The 

Equal relation is defined by temporal equivalence IA = IB ,corresponding to the SYNC operator. (4) The Inverse Group: 

The After , Contains , and Overlapped-by relations can be ex-pressed by swapping the arguments of SEQ and GUARD (e.g., 

SEQ (nB , n A) resolves After ). 

Conclusion: Since all 13 relations map to parameterizations of Ocore or their constructive inverses, the set is operationally complete. □

5 The SELA Multi-Agent System 

We introduce SELA, the Time Series Event Logic Agents system, which realizes our Event Logic Tree theory. SELA empowers large vision-language models to act as time se-ries analysis experts, enabling them to perform explainable event detection with supporting clues organized as instanti-ated event logic trees. Figure 1 shows the overall architecture. We introduce its major components as follows. 

Central Logic Engine. The central logic engine serves as the “backend” of SELA with a three-layer architecture. The 

Definition Layer is at the top to store the schema of the event logic tree, including definitions of primitives (semantic description and physical channel designation) and the struc-tural relationships between them defined by nesting opera-tors in Section 4 The Instantiation Layer stores the intervals and confidence scores of instantiated primitives, and the Data Layer stores the multivariate time series data. The engine is responsible for computing the confidence of the whole event by recursively propagating the confidence scores from primi-tives to the root node via fuzzy logic operators. 

Unified Interface. The interface connects the agents and the backend. It provides a joint visual-symbolic visualization 

that displays the time series data side-by-side with the state of the logic tree. It parses the function calls from agents, execut-ing actions, and updating the view accordingly: if the action submits an artifact (e.g., a schema definition or primitive in-stance), the interface passes it to the logic engine, updates the logic tree status based on the execution results (e.g., confi-dence score on each node). If the action calls active visual-ization tools, the interface queries the backend and processes the selected signal section. Agents can dynamically zoom in on specific time windows augmented with view-dependent normalization to reveal local signal morphologies, and place 

reference markers as anchors to align temporal boundaries across channels. 

Agent Reasoning. The agent reasoning can be formulated as a Markov Decision Process (MDP). At step k, the state Sk

is defined by the task prompt Ptask and the cumulative inter-action history Hk−1. Specifically, the history consists of a sequence where each step comprises the agent’s thoughts ri,the action ai, and the multimodal observation oi (e.g., execu-tion logs, signal plots, or error feedback) returned from the environment. The process is formalized as follows: 

ak ∼ π(a | P task , Hk−1)

Hk = Hk−1 ⊕ ⟨ rk, a k, o k⟩ (8) The action space of the agents is standardized JSON func-tion calls .

Inter-Agent Collaboration. The complex grounding task is decomposed into two jobs, performed by two specialized agents. The agents are provided with different tool sets, and collaborate via the shared environment . Agents submit their jobs as artifacts , which are job-specific data structures with pre-defined schema [Qian et al. , 2025]. Artifacts are parsed from agents’ function calls, and strict schema checks are en-forced to prevent error propagation in the system. (i) Logic Analyst is responsible for the semantic trans-lation of the unstructured textual event description into an Event Logic Tree schema. Its primary duties include identify-ing atomic primitives, deducing hierarchical temporal-logical relationships (e.g., SEQ , SYNC ), and organizing these as a 

Schema Artifact . The Analyst is able to iteratively optimize the schema structure by observing the visualization. (ii) Signal Inspector instantiates the ELT schema by ex-amining the actual time series data. By utilizing visualization tools, the Inspector analyzes both global and local morpholo-gies of the signal. It submits candidate detections as Instan-tiation Artifacts (primitive intervals with confidence scores) and refines these boundaries through cross-referencing the signal view with the updated logic tree status. It maximizes the confidence score at the root node, which represents the global event. 

6 The KITE Dataset 

In this section, we introduce the first K-TSED dataset, KITE (Knowledge-Infused Time Series Events), which is curated from real-world time series data collected from the energy production domain. 

6.1 Data Collection 

We use multivariate time series data from pressure test jobs ,a critical well exploration operation in the oil and gas indus-try. The objective of pressure test is to acquire the under-ground pressure at different depth to characterize the reser-voir. During pressure test jobs, sensors are installed at certain depths in the drilling well for remote measurements. We col-lected a dataset of 41 real underground pressure test jobs from drilling wells in the North Sea. In one pressure test job, the pressure acquisitions can be successful (i.e., valid test ) or unsuccessful ( lost seal ). A suc-cessful test contains two successive sub-stages: drawdown 

and buildup . Two channels are essential for event detection: 

pressure (psi) and volume (cc) .

6.2 Data Annotation 

The collected data was annotated in two stages. In the first stage, two field engineers with over 20 years of experience manually inspected every sample in the dataset using a pro-fessional software Insitu Pro [Fries et al. , 2024] to identify the classes and boundaries of all the events. Their results were then cross-verified to ensure 100% agreement .In the second stage, the field engineers documented tex-tual guidance for event detection assisted by an experienced AI engineer. This collaboration ensures a well-structured de-scription and accurate term choice for describing time-series patterns. 

6.3 Dataset Statistics 

To facilitate in-depth experimental analysis, we create two sub-datasets from KITE by slicing the raw signal accord-ing to the presence of events: (i) KITE-easy comprises 48 samples with two sub-stage events drawdown (50%) and                              

> Dataset Metric Source Length Statistics
> Mean Std Min Max KITE-easy
> TS Sample 2078.52 1888.93 534 9742 Event: buildup 973.81 692.25 229 2817 Event: drawdown 102.35 167.53 7837 KITE-hard
> TS Sample 2328.44 2900.57 578 14145 Event: lost seal 804.50 668.70 234 1945 Event: valid test 982.54 707.13 262 3386
> Table 3: Statistics by Dataset.

buildup (50%), which possess simple temporal-logic struc-tures. The two events occur sequentially without overlap; (ii) KITE-hard comprises 32 samples with two higher-level events valid test (87.5%) (parent event of drawdown and buildup) and lost seal (12.5%). The two events are mutu-ally exclusive, requiring the model to both locate and classify. Their complex temporal-logic compositions also increase the difficulty. The significantly imbalanced label distribution is another challenge of KITE-hard. Table 3 shows further statistical details. Both time se-ries samples and events vary significantly in length, and events like drawdown are short compared to the overall signal length, making the detection challenging. 

7 Experiments 

7.1 Experimental Setup 

Baselines. We set the following anchors for analysis: (i) 

Random guessing ; (ii) Supervised models under low-resource settings , we consider training shallow networks with basic architectures: CNN and Transformer [Vaswani et al. , 2017], and fine-tuning time series foundation models in-cluding Timer [Liu et al. , 2024], Moment [Goswami et al. ,2024] and Chronos [Ansari et al. , 2024]; (iii) Few-shot/Zero-shot LLM/VLM solutions , including Numeric, which di-rectly inputs time series data as digits, and VL-Time [Liu et al. , 2025], which applies visualization to time series data to let VLMs reason on figures. (iv) Human data scientists .Two data scientists perform event detection independently with the same labeling tool used for ground truth annotation (Section 6.2). Each tester possessed over three years of expe-rience in the energy industry, but had no prior experience with the data we used. Therefore, the testers could only read the pattern descriptions and identify the events based on their un-derstanding. (v) We set a special “Oracle” variant to SELA on each VLM, which let the models perform instantiation di-rectly with ground-truth ELTs parsed by human experts. We did not include other symbolic approaches for compar-ison, because they are either tailored specifically for classifi-cation (Z-Time) or typically require manual rule-engineering (STL, Chronicle), making adaptation to our task difficult. 

Evaluation Metrics. Following previous work on time se-ries event detection [Redina et al. , 2025; Khaouja et al. ,2025], we apply the IoU-based F1 scores as metrics to mea-sure performance. We set two IoU thresholds: 0.5 and 0.9 to better discriminate models by their abilities in precise event localization. Category Method KITE-easy KITE-hard F1@0.5 F1@0.9 F1@0.5 F1@0.9                                                                               

> Random Guessing 14.58 2.08 13.79 3.45 Supervised Models CNN 34.94 9.66 42.22 8.39 Transformer 41.97 21.23 45.28 15.29 Timer 40.13 22.68 21.44 9.02 Moment 40.02 6.59 40.44 3.33 Chronos 49.02 28.42 38.08 20.18 Few-shot LLMs GPT-4.1 (Numeric) 41.23 16.02 12.50 9.38 GPT-4.1 (VL-Time) 43.89 16.59 15.63 13.72 GPT-5 (Numeric) 70.64 39.32 69.13 65.84 GPT-5 (VL-Time) 59.48 30.77 48.21 43.75 Zero-shot LLMs GPT-4.1 (Numeric) 39.86 15.81 9.38 7.29 GPT-4.1 (VL-Time) 40.76 15.63 10.42 6.25 GPT-4.1 ( SELA )55.21 18.92 46.88 18.75 GPT-4.1 ( SELA Oracle )57.43 20.33 58.37 24.13 GPT-5 (Numeric) 65.97 36.46 62.06 58.62 GPT-5 (VL-Time) 55.35 22.71 44.83 41.38 GPT-5 ( SELA )83.33 44.79 79.31 68.96 GPT-5 ( SELA Oracle )83.33 45.06 82.76 72.41
> Human Data Scientists 88.33 88.33 85.06 81.61

Table 4: Comparison of different models and methods on KITE-easy and KITE-hard (in %). 

Implementation Details. For foundation models, we added linear heads for timestamp-wise classification and fine-tuned the entire models. Considering the small scale of datasets in use, all the supervised models were tested with 5-fold cross-validation, and average F1 scores were reported. Regard-ing few/zero-shot LLM methods, strong instruction following was the major criterion of model selection, and smaller open-source LLMs currently struggle in even basic settings like Numeric and VL-Time. Based on that, we chose to compare a standard model (GPT-4.1) with a reasoning model (GPT-5). 

7.2 Main Results 

As displayed in Table 4, among LLM/VLM-based time series reasoning methods, SELA significantly outperforms few-shot/zero-shot Numeric and VL-Time on both GPT-4.1 and GPT-5. SELA based on GPT-5 is the second best over all settings, surpassed only by human data scientists, with an F1@0.5 close to human level, but precise localization (F1@0.9) still lagging behind. We found that pre-trained foundation models were constrained in our low-resource set-ting, and shallower networks like the basic Transformer could perform well. Another interesting phenomenon is that smaller models like CNN and Transformer did better on the hard set than the easy set, which may be due to the imbal-anced label distribution, as shallow networks can easily fit to the majority category. While in the zero-shot/few-shot set-ting, the descriptions of both majority and minority events were presented equally, making weaker models like GPT-4.1 easily confused, resulting in low performance. With ELT, the chance of identifying the right events is significantly im-proved ( 4× in F1@0.5 compared to VL-Time Zero-shot) and also enhances precision in deciding the event boundaries (double in F1@0.9). Regarding token efficiency, it takes the agents 5.2 turns on average to perform instantiation, with to-ken usage close to that of Numeric. By comparing with “Or-GPT-5 GPT-4.1 

> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> F1 Score (%)
> 83.3
> 55.2
> 44.8
> 22.9
> 80.2
> 51.0
> 34.4
> 18.8
> SELA (F1@0.5)
> SELA (F1@0.9)
> w/o ELT (F1@0.5)
> w/o ELT (F1@0.9)

(a) KITE-easy GPT-5 GPT-4.1  

> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> F1 Score (%)
> 79.3
> 46.9
> 69.0
> 18.8
> 21.9
> 15.6
> 18.8
> 12.5
> SELA (F1@0.5)
> SELA (F1@0.9)
> w/o ELT (F1@0.5)
> w/o ELT (F1@0.9)

(b) KITE-hard Figure 2: Evaluation results of ablation study on KITE-easy and KITE-hard. 

acle” baselines, we can see that human-parsed ELTs are gen-erally more reliable than those parsed by LLMs, especially for GPT-4.1, which is less capable in structured prediction compared to the reasoning model GPT-5. 

7.3 Ablation Study 

To understand the actual contribution of ELT, we performed an ablation study by letting the LLMs predict solely with the active visualization tools. When it is necessary to decide the type of event, the LLMs are requested to report event-level confidence scores for comparison, instead of using aggre-gated confidence scores from ELTs. In the easy setting, where the model does not need to discriminate the types, and the temporal-logic compositions are simpler, the models can per-form detection mostly by zooming and observing local/global patterns. The contribution of ELT is mainly to marginally im-prove the detection quality. However, when it comes to mu-tually exclusive events with deeper composition hierarchies, the active visualization tools become detrimental, causing the entire system to collapse: the VLMs are either trapped in lo-cal morphological features or become overly confident, mak-ing no discrimination by assigning 0.9 or 1 to all categories. Through the guidance of the logic tree structure, LLMs can make local inspection while keeping the global event struc-ture in mind, and confidence score propagation effectively prevents hallucinated direct prediction. 

8 Conclusion 

In this work, we define the task of knowledge-guided time se-ries event detection with the first benchmark based on real in-dustry data. To effectively tackle this low-resource challenge, we present the event logic tree knowledge representation sys-tem for multivariate time series events, and build SELA, a zero-shot neural-symbolic agentic system combining large vision-language models with ELT. Experiments show promis-ing results with SELA compared to supervised models and previous methods utilizing LLMs/VLMs in time series anal-ysis. Through an ablation study, we show that ELT is indis-pensable for discriminative detection on complex time series events with deep compositional hierarchies. 

Acknowledgement 

This work contains information provided by the North Sea Transition Authority. References 

James F. Allen. Maintaining knowledge about temporal inter-vals. Commun. ACM , 26(11):832–843, November 1983. Abdul Fatir Ansari, Lorenzo Stella, Ali Caner T¨ urkmen, Xiyuan Zhang, Pedro Mercado, Huibin Shen, Oleksandr Shchur, Syama Sundar Rangapuram, Sebastian Pineda-Arango, Shubham Kapoor, Jasper Zschiegner, Danielle C. Maddix, Hao Wang, Michael W. Mahoney, Kari Torkkola, Andrew Gordon Wilson, Michael Bohlke-Schneider, and Bernie Wang. Chronos: Learning the language of time se-ries. Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. , 2024, 2024. Christophe Dousson and Pierre Le Maigat. Chronicle recog-nition improvement using temporal focusing and hierar-chization. In IJCAI , volume 7, pages 324–329, 2007. Steven Elsworth and Stefan G¨ uttel. ABBA: adaptive brown-ian bridge-based symbolic aggregation of time series. Data Min. Knowl. Discov. , 34(4):1175–1200, 2020. Sebastien Fries, Tianjun Hou, Amine Ennaifer, Lei Jiang, Jos-selin Kherroubi, and Hadrien Dumont. Methods and sys-tems for flagging events in a time series and evaluating a downhole operation, June 25 2024. US Patent 12,018,559. Mononito Goswami, Konrad Szafer, Arjun Choudhry, Yifu Cai, Shuo Li, and Artur Dubrawski. MOMENT: A family of open time-series foundation models. In Forty-first In-ternational Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2024, Vienna, Austria, July 21-27, 2024 . OpenReview.net, 2024. Imane Khaouja, Amine EL KHAIR, Abdallah Benzine, Se-bastiaan Buiting, Soumyadipta Sengupta, and Youssef Tamaazousti. Do large foundation models improve time series segmentation? an industrial case study in oil and gas drilling. In 1st ICML Workshop on Foundation Models for Structured Data , 2025. Zed Lee, Tony Lindgren, and Panagiotis Papapetrou. Z-time: efficient and effective interpretable multivariate time series classification. Data Min. Knowl. Discov. , 38(1):206–236, 2024. Jessica Lin, Eamonn Keogh, Stefano Lonardi, and Bill Chiu. A symbolic representation of time series, with implications for streaming algorithms. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM SIGMOD Workshop on Research Issues in Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , DMKD ’03, page 2–11, New York, NY, USA, 2003. Association for Computing Machin-ery. Yong Liu, Haoran Zhang, Chenyu Li, Xiangdong Huang, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. Timer: Generative pre-trained transformers are large time series models. In 

Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2024, Vienna, Austria, July 21-27, 2024 . OpenRe-view.net, 2024. Haoxin Liu, Chenghao Liu, and B. Aditya Prakash. A pic-ture is worth A thousand numbers: Enabling llms reason about time series via visualization. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL 2025 - Volume 1: Long Papers, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA, April 29 - May 4, 2025 , pages 7486–7518. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2025. Oded Maler and Dejan Nickovic. Monitoring temporal prop-erties of continuous signals. In Formal Techniques, Mod-elling and Analysis of Timed and Fault-Tolerant Systems ,pages 152–166, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2004. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. Simon Malinowski, Thomas Guyet, Ren´ e Quiniou, and Ro-main Tavenard. 1d-sax: A novel symbolic representation for time series. In International Symposium on Intelligent Data Analysis , pages 273–284. Springer, 2013. Navid Mohammadi Foumani, Lynn Miller, Chang Wei Tan, Geoffrey I. Webb, Germain Forestier, and Mahsa Salehi. Deep learning for time series classification and extrinsic regression: A current survey. ACM Comput. Surv. , 56(9), April 2024. Abdullah Mueen, Eamonn Keogh, and Neal Young. Logical-shapelets: an expressive primitive for time series classifi-cation. In Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGKDD Inter-national Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , KDD ’11, page 1154–1162, New York, NY, USA, 2011. Association for Computing Machinery. Mathias Perslev, Michael Hejselbak Jensen, Sune Darkner, Poul Jørgen Jennum, and Christian Igel. U-time: A fully convolutional network for time series segmentation applied to sleep staging. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems 32: Annual Conference on Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, Decem-ber 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada , pages 4417–4428, 2019. Chen Qian, Zihao Xie, Yifei Wang, Wei Liu, Kunlun Zhu, Hanchen Xia, Yufan Dang, Zhuoyun Du, Weize Chen, Cheng Yang, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Scaling large language model-based multi-agent collaboration. In 

The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations, ICLR 2025, Singapore, April 24-28, 2025 .OpenReview.net, 2025. Richard Redina, Jakub Hejc, Marina Filipenska, and Zdenek Starek. Analyzing the performance of biomedical time-series segmentation with electrophysiology data. Scientific Reports , 15(1):11776, 2025. Ramprasaath R. Selvaraju, Michael Cogswell, Abhishek Das, Ramakrishna Vedantam, Devi Parikh, and Dhruv Batra. Grad-cam: Visual explanations from deep networks via gradient-based localization. In IEEE International Confer-ence on Computer Vision, ICCV 2017, Venice, Italy, Octo-ber 22-29, 2017 , pages 618–626. IEEE Computer Society, 2017. Mukund Sundararajan, Ankur Taly, and Qiqi Yan. Ax-iomatic attribution for deep networks. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2017, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6-11 August 2017 ,volume 70 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research ,pages 3319–3328. PMLR, 2017. Akara Supratak, Hao Dong, Chao Wu, and Yike Guo. Deep-sleepnet: A model for automatic sleep stage scoring based on raw single-channel eeg. IEEE Transactions on Neu-ral Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering , 25(11):1998– 2008, 2017. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszko-reit, Llion Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Il-lia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30: Annual Con-ference on Neural Information Processing Systems 2017, December 4-9, 2017, Long Beach, CA, USA , pages 5998– 6008, 2017. Zhe Xie, Zeyan Li, Xiao He, Longlong Xu, Xidao Wen, Tiey-ing Zhang, Jianjun Chen, Rui Shi, and Dan Pei. Chatts: Aligning time series with llms via synthetic data for en-hanced understanding and reasoning. Proc. VLDB Endow. ,18(8):2385–2398, 2025. Zahra Zamanzadeh Darban, Geoffrey I. Webb, Shirui Pan, Charu Aggarwal, and Mahsa Salehi. Deep learning for time series anomaly detection: A survey. ACM Comput. Surv. ,57(1), October 2024.